



Quant Job Interview Questions and Answers


Mark Joshi Nick Denson Andrew Downes























@Mark Joshi, Nick Denson, Andrew Downes 2008

Version 1.01




Contents



Preface
What this book is and is not How to use this book Website
Structure
The publication of this book

Chapter 1.	he interview process
1.1. Introduction
1.2. Getting an interview
1.3. The standard interview
1.4. The phone interview
1.5. The take-home exam
1.6. The exam
1.7. Follow-up
1.8. Dos and don't
1.9. When to apply?
1.10. The different roles
1.11. Sorts of employers
   1.12. Where people go wrong Chapter 2.	Option pricing
 
vii vii vii viii viii ix

1
1
1
3
5
6
6
7
8
9
10
12
13

15

iv	CONTENTS
2.2.5. General	21
2.2.6. Trees and Monte Carlo	21
2.2.7. Incomplete markets	22
2.3. So]utions	22
2.3.1. Black-Scholes	22
2.3.2. Option price properties	33
2.3.3. Hedging and replication	51
2.3.4. The Greeks	58
2.3.5. General	62
2.3.6. Trees and Monte Car]o	65

2.3.7. Incomplete markets

Chapter 3.	Probability
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Questions
3.2.1. General
3.2.2. Stochastic processes
3.3. Solutions
3.3. L	General
3.3.2.	Stochastic processes

Chapter 4.	Interest rates
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Questions
4.3. Solutions

Chapter 5.	Numerical techniques and algorithms
5.1. Introduction
5.2. Questions
5.3. So]utions

Chapter 6.	Mathematics
6.1. Introduction
6.2. Questions
6.2.1. General
6.2.2. Integration and differentiation
6.3. Solutions

72
79
79
80
80
84
85
85
124

147
147
148
148

157
157
157
159

189
189
189
189
191
192



6.3.1. General

CONTENTS	V

192

6.3.2. Integration and differentiation

Chapter 7.	Coding in C++
7 .1.	Introduction
7.2. Questions
7.3. Solutions
Chapter 8.	Logic/Brainteasers
8.1. Introduction
8.2. Questions
8.3. Solutions
Chapter 9.	The soft interview
9 .1.	Introduction
9.2. Soft questions and answers
9.3. Finance data questions

Chapter 10.	Top ten questions
10.1. Introduction
  10.2. Questions Bibliography
Index

210
223
223
226
233
275
275
276
279
297
297
297
303
305
305
305
307
309





Preface

What this book is and is not

    The purpose of this book is to get yon through your first interviews for qnant jobs. We have gathered a large number of questions that have actually been asked and provided solutions for them al]. Our target reader will have already studied and learnt a book on introductory financial ma.thematics such as "The Concepts and Practice of Mathematical Finance." He will also have learnt how to code in C++ and coded up a few derivatives pricing models, and read a book such as "C++ Design Patterns and Derivatjves Pricing."
   This book is not intended to teach the basic concepts from scratch, instead it shows how these are tested in an interview situation .. However, actuaJly tackling and knowing the answers to aJI the problems will undoubtedly teach the reader a great deal and improve their performance at interviews.
   Many readers may find many of the questions silly and/or annoying, so did the authors! Unfortunately, you have to answer what you are asked and thinking the question is silly does not help. Arguing with the interviewer about why they asked you it wiJl only make things worse. For that reason, we have included many questions which we would never ask and think that no one should ask. That said, if the questions are too siJly then you may want to consider whether you want to work fo:r the interviewer.


How to use this book

   We strongly advise you to attempt the questions seriously before looking at the answers. You will learn a lot more that way. You may also come up with different solutions. We have included a number of follow-up questions
vii

viii	PREFACE

without solutions in the answers, which may or may not have been asked in a live interview. Tack.ling these wi11 help you refine your skills. Some questions come up time and time again, so if you have actually learnt all the answers then there is no doubt you will eventuaHy get some duplicates, but that is not really the point; it is more important to be able to tackle all the types of questions that arise and to identify your weaknesses so you can address them.
   Eventually, of course, the interviewers will buy copies of this book to make sure that the questions they use are not in it. Howeve.r, in the meantime, you can make the most of your comparative advantage...
   Many candidates at their initial interviews seem to have a poor idea of what is required. If you find the questions in this book unreasonably hard, you are not yet ready. If you think that you will never be able to do them; then now is a good time to think of an a]ternative career. If you are on top of these sorts of questions, you should have no problem getting an entry level job. So use this book to judge when you are ready. If possible, get a friend, who is experienced, to give you a practice interview when you think you have reached that point.


Website

   Inevitably readers will have pienty of questions regarding this book's contents. For that reason, there is a forum on www.aarkjoshi.com to discuss its content. In particu1ar, if you think a solution is wrong, or want a solution to a follow,-up question, then thi isthe place to ask. There are also a Jot of additional resources such as recommended book lists, discussion of problems, job adverts and career advice on that site.

Structure

   This book is structured as follows: we start with a discussion of the interview process in Chapter 1 including how to get one as well as how to conduct yourse]f during one. We then move on to actual interview questions; each chapter contains some general discussion, a set of questions from real-life interviews. and then solutions with follow-up questions. We divide these into topics by chapter: option pricing, probability, interest ratest numerical techniques, mathematics, coding in

T.HE PUBLICATION OF nus :BOOK

C++, and brainteasers. We then discuss how to handle a "soft interview", that is
a. non-technical interview, and list possible questions. We finish with a list of ten of the most popular questions from quant interviews.

The pubHcation of this book

   The reader may be curious to know how this book bas been published. We decided not to go with conventional publishers for a number of reasons. The first is simply that the authors lose all control; once you have signed on the dotted line a.II the understanding and reassurances from your editor become worthless. A second is timing, a conventional publisher can easily take two years to get a book from draft to release. We have therefore gone with print-on-demand direct sa1es.
   With this approach to publishing, the book is printed and bound after the order is made. There is therefore no overhead but the final product is of equally high quality. We hope that you will support this publishing revolution with your purchases and the books you write.



CHAPTER 1

The interview process

1.1. Introduction

   In this chapter, we look at how to get a job interview and then what happens once you have one. We a]so discuss the types of interview, the genera] process and what happens afterward. It is important to reahse that how you behave in and approach the interview can have a marked effect on your chances. We round off with a discussion of the different roles, areas and types of employers.
   The,re are, of course, many sorts of interviews and many ways for the interviewer to conduct it, but ultimately the interviewer wants to find out two things:

• Do you have the technical ability to do the job?
• Will you behave reasonably? That is, will you do what you are asked and get on with othe.rs.

The first wiU be assessed via a barrage of technical questions, and the second by
observing your behaviour and on how you respond to genera] questions..
   Most interviews focus largely on technical ability, since most candidates fail at this point. However, on the rare occasion there are multiple candidates who are good enough technica11y, other factors do become important.


1.2. Getting an interview

   For many candidates, the biggest problem is getting the interview in the first place. There are many ways to get that far. The first thing to remember is that in hiring "like attracts like."

2 l. THE INTERVIEW PROCESS

   Do you know anyone with a similar background who's now working in the City? If so, ask if you can come down for a chat. This may translate rather quickly into a job offer. If a PhD student the year above you is applying for jobs in finance, make sure to make friends with him before he leaves. Keep in touch and when the, time comes make use of the contact. Once you have exhausted all the people you know with similar backgrounds; try the ones with different backgrounds and then friends of friends.
   Some places, for example BarCap, now have quantitative associates pro­ grammes and you apply vi.a the bank's web-site, otherwise interviews tend to come via recruitment consultants also known as "headhunters." Some recruitment firms now even map out the PhD c1asse-s in mathematics and physics departments at top universities: if you are looking for someone to sponsor your social events, they are a good place to start!
   Headhunters generally call you down for a meeting to make sure that you are presentable. They then send you to a couple of interviews to see how you do. If you do well they will get very enthusiastic and then send you to lots of places. If you do badly they will quickly lose interest and it is time to find a new headhunte,r.
   A much-discussed and difficult to answer question is how many firms to use at once. My inclination is to start with one or two and see how it goes. As long as they are getting you plenty of interviews, there 1s no point in registering somewhere else. But if they aren't, then it is time to try another firm.
    A.n important fact to realise is that headhunters are paid by commission (e.g. 20% of your first-year package) on a placement basis. The motivations and incentives are therefore a lot like real estate agents:

• they really want to place you (good);
• they want you to get a high salary: commission is a percentage (good};
• they would much rather place you quickly in any job than slowly in a better one (not so good);
• they will be unhappy if you accept a job through someone e]se, (no commission == no fee == very unhappy);
• they may or may not be interested in a long term relationship; you will be worth five times as much in five years to them.

L'.3. THE STANDARD INTE.RVIEW	3

   A headhunter's business is relationships and information. They are therefore keen not to damage their reputation and also to get as much information as possible about who you know and who is doing what. Always bear this is mind when talking to them. Once you actually get a job, you will regularly get calls from them fishing for information and seeing if you are interested in roles they won7t be keen to tell you much about until you are firmly their client. It is OK to talk to them but do NOT under ANY circumstances discuss any of your colleagues; this could get you fired. (For similar reasons, never ever talk to journalists but refer them to corporate communications or your boss.)
Two headhunter firms that have their own guides to becoming a quant and
have good reputations are:

• Pau1 and Dominic. The "Paul" is Paul Wilmott the financial mathemati­ cian. They have the advantage of actually understanding the job they are trying to place you in.
• Michael Page.



l.3. The standard interview

   The most common interview consists of arriving at the bank's offices, you ask for some person whose name you have been given7 you sit in the lobby and wait. Eventually someone comes and gets you, you are then shown into a meeting room. There may be one or several interviewers present. You have already had several chances to mess up. Make sure that:

• you arrive dead on time: being early really irritates, and being late displays disorganisation;
• you wear a suit and are looking well groomed;
• you know and remember the name of the person you are meeting.;
• you have a copy of your CV with you, and do not expect them to have seen nor read it;
• you have had plenty to ea:t and are not suffering a sugar low since that will destroy thinking power;
• you switch off your mobile phone.

4	1. THE INTERVIEW PROCESS

   Arriving dead on time is an art: the only way to do it is to arrive with half an hour to spare, and then go and find a cafe where you can have something to eat or drink. Having a lemonade is a good idea to keep sugar levels up. Don't drink too much, however, or you will be rushing to the loo in the middle of the interview. Also try to assess how long the queue at reception is. If it is looking long you may need to join it ten minutes before your scheduled arrival time.
   The interviewer may or may not be the person who fetched you from reception. When the interviewer arrives he (or she) will typically give you the chance to ask a few questions. Whilst it is good to ask a little, e.g. what the team does, where it sits, how many people are in it, what sort of role you are being considered for, it is best not to drag this part out since if you do badly in the technical interview it is all rather irrelevant. In addition, the interviewer may find too many questions at this stage annoying. There are often two or more interviewers rather than one, one will typically take the lead, however.
   You will then be asked very technical questions and typically be given either a whiteboard or a sheet of paper to work through them. If you get stuck, the interviewer will generally help you out, the more help you need the worse you have done. Some interviewers always ask the same level of questions, others will make the questions harder if you get them right, and easier if you get them wrong. Sometimes the interviewer will vary the questions to try and find what you are good at, if anything.
Important points to remember are:

• Do not argue with them about why they asked something. If they asked, they want the answer. Disputing will make you look difficult and weak technically.
• The thinking process counts as well as the solution, so talk about how you are tackling it.
• They do not expect you to be able to do everything without help.
• If you are unsure of what they want, ask for clarification. For example, for a numerical or coding problem, do they just want a short solution, or do they want an optimal one?
Their expectations of you wilJ be affected by your c.v. For example, if you say that have read the interviewer's book then you had better know it well. (Authors

L4. THE PHONE INTERVIEW	5

are very vain about their books so do not say anything critical about it either.) If you say you are an ex.pe.rt In a coding language, e.g. C++, then be sure you can back the statement up.
   At the end, if you have done poorly, accept this graciously and ask for advi.ce on what to read and how to improve. Do not get into an argument with the interviewer about what happened; Just notch it up to experience and resolve to do better next time.
   Banks in the UK tend not to bother with paying expenses and particularly not for first interviews. In the US, they will sometimes pay depending upon the length of the trip.
   If you know that you will be there all day, it is worth taldng some refreshments in your bag.. Sugar lows and dehydration will badly affect your ability to think. Don't assume that it will have occurred to them that you need to eat and drink, just because you are th.ere from nine to five. Goldman Sachs is most notorious for grilling you across long days by several people.. They really do want you to meet everyone and if you cannot take the pace of the interviews, you won't be able to cope with working there.

1.4. The phone interview

   Phone interviews are generally used when it is not convenient to see the candidate in pe.rson. They are often a pre-screen to check whether a proper interview is worth the effort when travel is involved. When a team is international then they are used by the overseas part of the team. You wi1J never get a job without a face-to-face interview so this can on]y ever be one stage of the process.
   The process is not huge]y different from an in-person interview. Generally, there is only one intervi.ewer and they ask you a series of questions and chat with you a Jittle. The nature of the questions tends to be a Jittle different since they need to work over the phone. For that reason, the fraction of brainteasers are higher than normal.

6	1.• THE INTERYIEW PROCESS

The important points to remember are:

• use the best phone line you can, (which is generally not a mobile;)
• speak loudly and clearly;
• do not give the impression that you are looking things up in a book or on the web;
• have pen and paper bandy.


1.5. The take-home exam

   This again is used to decide whether it is worthwhile to bother with a proper interview. The.questions will largely reflect the interests of the hiring manager so they may focus on one tiny aspect of applied mathematics or probabiJity theory or even physics.
   Generally, they will e-mail it to you and expect a response within some set time period, e.g., 24 hours. Do not try to negotiate the. time available to do it, since this gives the impression that you are weak mathematically and generally difficult. It is acceptable to ask that the start time be moved, e.g., to a Saturday so that you can devote yourself to it
   If you decide to copy out solutions from a book, try not to be too blatant and make sure you copy out the right materia1. One candidate copied out the code for a vanilla can option from the interviewer's book when asked to code up an Asian option pricer. His application was not taken further.
   The presentation of the answers matters as well as correctness. So make sure your handwriting is clear and your steps are dearly explained.


1.6. . The exam

   The written exam which is not take-home is becoming more popular. Some banks are even setting a general exam for a Jarge number of candidates at once and then taking the highest performers. This has the virtue of clarity and fairness.. It also favours people who are good at exams rather than interviews, for better or worse.

1.7. FOLLOW-UP	7

   The main problem is that the questions tend to refl.ect the background of the setter rather than relevance to the job. However, this is no different from interviews.
   If you know you will be doing a written exam, then find out what the rules are. For examp]e, is it open book? How long will it last? Are you allowed to use a calculator? Make sure to bring your own calculator - sitting in a room on your own with a defective calculator (or none at all) can be very stressful.

1.7. Follow-up

   Most places will not give you feedback on the spot, but some occasionalJy will. If you got the interview via a recruitment agent, (i.e., headhunter) it will generally come that way. Othe,rwise, expect an e-mail a few days afterward. If you do not hear anything for a week or two, then it is perfectly reasonable to poUte1y ask what is happening. If you have done well, they may move very quickly since very few reaUy good candidates come along.
   Bear in mind, that if they do not want you for the job, it does not mean that they think poorly of you. The first author of this book is in touch with quite a few people he met when turning them down for a job - often it just means that the preparation was not quite right or there was a better candidate. These canrudates showed some potential and are now leading successful city careers after taking the feedback that they were given seriously. Related to this, remember that the quant circle is not very big so you will come across the same people repeatedly - don't destroy any re]ationships unnecessarily. Indeed, it is not unusual to find that after a takeover, you are working for the person who rejected you a year before.
   It is very rare to get the job after the first inte.rview.. Instead! if you do well they wilJ invite you back to meet more people.. If they are organised and keen you may have several interviews in one day, or they may get you back again and again, until you have met everyone. After two or three rounds of this they will make a decision.
   Generally the more times you are invited back, the keener they are. However, it can just refle-ct an inability to pool information. Going to ten interviews and then being told you are not getting the job because the second interview went badly is not unknown.

8 1. THE INTERVIEW PROCESS

1.8. Dos and don'ts

He.re's a checkHst of things to do and not do:

• don't be 1ate;
• don't be eady;
• don't argue with the interviewer about why they've asked you something;
• do appear enthusiastic;
• do wear a suit;
• do be eager to p]ease (they want someone who will do what they want7 you must give the appearance of being ob1iging rather than difficu]t)
• don't be too relaxed (they may well conclude that you aren't hungry enough for success to work. hard);
• don't tell them they shouldn't use C++ because my niche language
is better;
• do demonstrate an interest .in financial news;
• do be able to talk about everything on your CV ( a1so known as resume)
-have a prepared 2 minute response on eve,ry phrase in it;
• do bring copies of your CV;
• don't expect the interviewer to be familiar with your CV;
• don't say you've read a book unless you can discuss its contents; particular]y if they've written it;
• do be polite;
• do ask for feedback and don't argue about it (even if it is wrong try to
understand what made the interviewer think that);
• don't say you want to work in banking for the money (of course you do, but it's bad form to say so);
• do say you want to work closely with other people rather than solo;
• don't say that you think that bankers are reasonable people - they aren't
• do take a break from interviewing and do more prep if more than a couple of interviews go badly;
• don't use a mobi1e for a phone interview;
• do be able to explain your thesis - work out explanations for different
sorts of people in advance;
• don't expect banks in the UK to pay for interview expenses;
• don't spend more on expenses than has been agreed;

L9. WHEN TO APPLY?	9

• do ask about the group you' U be working in:
- how much turnover is there?
- where people go when they leave?
- how many peop]e are in the team?
- when can you meet the rest of the group? (only ask this if an offer appears imminent; if you can t meet the others, this is a big red flag: what's wrong with them?)
- how old the group is?
- what's the team's raison d'etre?
- is it expanding or contracting?
- what would a typical working day be?
• don't get on to the, topic of money ear1y in the process;
• don;t be cynical about what bankers do;
• don't accept an offer made under pressure.


1.9. When to apply?

   Most entry-leve,Jquants are hired because a specific team has a need for someone..Thms means that they want someone to start now and they want someone who wiU be productive quick1y.
   This means that you should not start applying unless you can start within the next two months. You should aJso wait until you are well-prepared. This is doubly the case in smaHer places. In London or New York, you can learn the hard way that you are not ready, but in Melbourne or somewhere similar, there, may be only two or three possible employers so you had better be sure you perform at your best from the start.
How can you tell if you are ready? Here are some indicators:

• Could you get ".N' in an exam on the contents of "the Concepts and Practice of Mathematical Finance" [6] ?
• Have you coded up some models in C++? (e.g. the computer projects
at the end of that book.)
• Are you on top of the contents of "C++ Design Patterns and Derivatives Pricing" [7] ?

10 1. THE JNTERVIEW PROCESS

• Can you do the intervi.ew questions in this book without too much difficulty?
• Can you tackle the supplementary questions in this book?
• Have you successfu11y completed a practice interview?

   The rules that apply to quantitative associates programs are different, since they wiU generally only be open at one point in the year. In these cases, find out what they want and what flexibility they have. Also, find out if failing one year wiU count against you the next year and take that into account too.

1.10. The different roles

   It is important to realise that there are many different types of quants who do different sorts of things. There are pros and cons of each and it is worth considering what sort of role you want, and communicating that to potential emp]oyers. A brief list is:
(1) front office/desk quant
(2) model validating quant;
(3) research quant;
(4) quant developer;
(5) statistical arbitrage quant;
(6) capital quant
(7) portfolio theorist.

   A desk quant implements pricing models directly used by traders. This can mean either very short term projects or longer term ones depending on the way the outfit is setup. The main advantage is that you are close to the rea] action both in terms of things happening and in terms of money. This is also a possible route jnto trading. The downside is that it can be stressfuJ and depending on the outfit may not involve much research.
    A model validation quant independently implements pricing models in order to check that front office models are correct. It tends to be more relaxed, and less stressful. The downsides are that model ·validation teams can be uninspired and far from the money. Also in some places, the quants spend their time running other peoples' models rather than coding their own which can be quite frustrating.

1.10. THE DIFFERENT ROLES	11

    A research quant trie to invent new pricing approaches and sometimes carries out blue-sky research. These are the most interesting quant jobs for those who love mathematics, and you learn a lot more. The main downside is that it is sometimes hard to justify your existence.
   Quantitative developers are programmers who generally implement other people's models. It is less exciting but generally well-paid and easier to find a job. This sort of job can vary a lot. It could be coding scripts quickly all the time, or working on a large sy tern debugging someone el e' code.
   The statistical arbitrage quant works on finding patterns in data to uggest automated trades. The techniques are quite different from those in derivatives pricing. This sort of job is most commonly found in hedge funds. The return on this type of position i highly volatile.
   A capital qua.nt works on modelling the bank's credit exposures and capital requirements. This is Jes sexy than derivatives pricing but is becoming more and more important with the advent of the Basel II banking accord. You can expect decent (but not great) pay, less stress and more sensible hours. There is currently a drive to mathematically model the chance of operational losses through fraud etc, with mixed degrees of success. The biggest downside of going into this area is that it will be hard to switch to derivatives pricing later on.
   Portfolio theorists use financial mathematics in the sense of Markowitz' portfolio theory rather than derivatives pricing and Black-Scholes. It is less technically demanding but there is certainly plenty of money in the area. There is a certain commonality between this area and capital modeling. Again it is hard to switch from this to derivatives pricing.
   People do banking for the money, and you tend to get paid more the closer you are to where the money is being made. This tran lates into a ort of snobbery where tho e clo e to the money look down on those who aren't. As a general rule, moving away from the money is easy, moving toward it is hard.

12	1. THE I TERVIEW PROCESS

1.11. Sorts of employers

   There is quite a lot of variety in terms of sort	of employers. We give a rough catalogue:
• commercial bank , e.g., RBS, HSBC;
• investment banks, e.g., Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brother ;
• hedge funds, e.g., the Citadel Group;
• accountancy firms;
• software companies.

Each of these has its pro  and con .
   Large commercial banks tend to have large trading operation , but are influenced by the culture of the rest of the bank. The effect of this is that they tend to be less tough but also le	exciting in terms of products and projects compared to investment banks or hedge fund . The advantages are shorter hour and better job ecurity. The main di advantage tends to be less money!
   Investment bank , particularly American ones, tend to expect longer hour and have a generally tougher culture. They are much readier to hire and fire. If you want an astronomical bonus, however, they are the place to go.
   Hedge funds tend to demand a lot of work. They are very volatile and have been a big growth industry in recent years. They have, however, been badly hit by the credit crisi in 2008; they may, or may not, emerge well. The packages tend to reflect very large risk premia.
   In general, American banks and firms pay better but demand longer hour than European ones.
   The big accountancy firm	have quant teams for consulting. The main disadvantage is that you are far from the action, and high quality individuals tend to work in banks o it may be hard to find someone to learn from. Some firm are very good on external employee training, however, and will end employee on Masters courses or regular training courses.
   There is an increasing move toward outsourcing quant modeling by pur­ chasing off the shelf software models. One option is therefore to work for the software company instead. The issues are similar to tho e with working for

1.12. WHERE PEOPLE GO WRONG	13

accountancy firms. The growth in availability of open-source financial software such as QuantLib may bit these companies in the medium term.


1.12. Where people go wrong

    A certain number of people try and fail to get quant jobs; it therefore has a reputation as a tough area to get into. The biggest reasons for failure are:
• mistaken ideas about the know]edge required;
• inability to code;
• personality defects;
• non-possession of appropriate degrees;
• lack of ability at mathematics;
• mispercephon of own ability.

If none of these applyt and you have done your preparation then it is actually quite easy to ge,t a job, and you will be snapped up within weeks if not days.
   What if some do apply? This book should make it clear what is required and how to acquire the necessary knowledge. If you don't know how to code, then you simply have to learn by picking up the books and coding some mode1s. If you can;t do this, try a different career.
   If you have personality defects then well done for recognising the fact. Quant jobs are not an area where personality counts for a lot at entry level. Try reading a few books in the <>self-help" section of the book-shop and work on your people skills. You only have to appear norma1 for a couple of hours to get the job.
   The simp]e truth is that if you app1y for quant jobs without something that says you are really good at maths in your c.v. then you won't get interviews. You therefore have, to get a degree that demonstrates the ability and knowledge you claim, or do something that shows the requisite skins in other ways.
    If you simply aren't that great at mathematics then this is not the career for you. Even if you manage to get that ·first job, you will be working day in, day out with people who Jove mathematics and can't imagine doing anything else.. You wiU not thrive in that environment, better to find something you have natural talent in.

14	L TI-IE INTERVIEW PROCESS

   Inability to assess one's own ability quickly shows up when you think you are on top of everything and you start bombing tb.e interviews. If you keep failing the interviews, it is a strong lesson that you need to reassess yourself. Getting a friend who is already in the quant area to do a practice interview is a good way to assess your ability. Working through the problems in this book and seeing how many you can do without help is another way.
   Ultimately., there aren't really that marry people who are very strong at mathematics. If you are one of those people, the quant career is very attractive and easy to get into; if you aren't then it is hard.

CHAPTER 2

Option pricing

2.1. Introduction

   The majority of work for quants in a bank is focused on the pricing of options. It is not surprising then that a large section of this book is dedicated to option pricing questions. Before even looking at financial models however, one needs to understand some of the more fundamental properties of option prices, such as no arbitrage bounds. For example, how does the price of a call option vary with time? What happens as volatility tends to infinity?
   The classical model of Black and Scholes is almost certain to come up in any interview, so make sure you understand this model. You should be able to derive the pricing fo:rmu]a for at least a European call option and be able to extend it to different payoffs. It is also worth understanding the Greeks: what they mean and what they are in the Black-Scholes model.
   Another key aspect of financial modeling is hedging and replication. Having a good understanding of what replication is and how you can replicate an unusual payoff with vanilla options is a valuable skill. Some banks manage to make large sums of money by repJicating an exotic option with vaniHa options, and you wilJ be expected to have a good understanding of replication: both static and dynamic.
   We briefly mention a few introductory books on option pricing. We also refer the reader to a. much longer list, which is occasionally updated, on www.m.arkjoshi.com.
   This book of interview questions can be viewed as a. companion book to the first author's book on derivatives pricing: "The Concepts and Practice of


15

16	2. OPTION PRICJNG

Mathematical Finance." For those who wish to have some alternatives, here are some standard choices:
• J. Hull, "Options, Futures and Other Derivatives," - sometimes called the ubible book." Gives a good run-down of how the markets work but is aimed at MBAs rather than mathematicians so the mathematics is quite weak.
• T. Bjork, "Arbitrage Theory in Continuous Time.'' This book is on the theoretical side with the author having a background in probability theory, but he also has a good understanding of the underlying finance and he is good at translating intuition into theory and back.
• S. Shreve, ''Stochastic Calculus for Finance Vols I and II." A careful and popular exposition of the the-0ry.
• P. Wilmott, various books. Good expositions of the PDE approach to finance, but not so good on the martingale approach.
• M. Baxter and A. Rennie,. "Financial Calculus." A good introductory book on the martingale approach which requires a reasonable level of mathematical sophistication but also has good intuition.

2.2. Questions

2.2.1. Black-Scholes.
   QuESTION 2.1. Derive the Black-Scholes equation for a stock, S. What boundary conditions are satisfied at S = 0 and S = oo?
   QuEsnoN 2.2. Derive the Black-Scholes equation so that an undergrad can understand it.
QuESTJON 2.3. Exp1ain the Black--Scholes equation.
    QuESTtON 2.4. Suppose two assets in a Black-Scholes world have the same volatility but different drifts. How will the price of call options on them compare? Now suppose one of the assets undergoes downward jumps at random times. How will this affect option price-s?
   QuESTION 2.5. Suppose an asset has a deterministic time dependent volatility. How would I price an option on it using the Black-Scholes theory? How would I hedge it?

2.2. QUESTWONS	17
   QuEsTmN 2.6. In the Black-Scholes world; price a European option with a payoff of
max(S} - Kl 0)
at time T.
QUESTION 2.7. Develop a formula for the price of a derivative paying
max(ST(Sr - K), 0)
in the Black-Scholes model.

2.2.2. Option pri.ce properties.
QUESTION 2.8. Sketch the value of a vanilla call option as a function of spot.
How will it evolve with time?
QuES-TION 2.9. Is it ever optimal to early exercise an American call option?
Vvbat about a put option?
   QuEsTION 2.10. In PX markets an option can be expressed as either a call or a put, explain. Relate your answer to Question 2.9.
   QuESTJON 2.11. Approximately how much would a one-month can option at-the-money with a million dollar notional and spot 1 be worth?
   QuBSTION 2.12. Suppose a call option only pays off if spot never passes befow a barrier B.. Sketch the value as a function of spot. Now suppose the option only pays off if spot passes below B inste.ad. Sketch the value of the option again. Relate the two graphs.
QuESTION 2.13. What i.s meant by put-call parity?
   QUESTION 2.14.·what happens to the price of a vanilla call option as volatility tends to infinity?
    QuESTION 2.15. Suppose there are no interest rates. Thespot price of a non-dividend paying stock is 20. Option A pays 1 dollar if the stock price is above 30 at any time in the next year. Option B pays 1 if the stock price is above 30 at the end of the year. How are the values of A and B related?
   QuBSTION 2.16. How does the value of a call option vary with time? Prove your result.

18	2. OPTION PRICING

   QuEsnoN 2.17. A put and call on a stock struck at the forward price have the same value by put-call parity. Yet the value of a put is bounded and the value of a call is unbounded. Explain how they can have the same value.
   QuESTION 2.18. Suppose we price a digital call in both normal and log­ normal models in such a way th.at the price of call option with the same strike is invariant. How wil1 the prices differ?
   QuESTtoN 2.19. What is riskier: a call option or the underlying? (Consider a one-day time horizon and compute which has bigger Delta as a fraction of value.)
    QuESTION 2.20. If the stock price at time Tis distributed as N(So> o-2) what is the expected value of an at-the-money European call expiring at time T?
   QuESTION 2.21. Assume that the price of a stock at time T is N(So,a2) where 80 is the price now and that we know the price of an at-the-money European call expiring at T. How could we estimate a?
   QuESTJON 2.22. A stock S is worth $100 now at t = 0. At t = 1, S goes either to $110 with probability = 2/3 or to $80 with prob 1/3. If interest rates are zero, value an at-the-money Europe.an call on S expiring at t = 1.
   QuBSTION 2.23. Sketch the value of a ·vanilla call and a digital call as a function of spot. Relate the two.
QuEsTt:oN 2.24. Price a 1 year forward, risk free rate = 5%1 spot = $1 and a
dividend of $0.10 after 6 months.
QuESTioN 2.25. What is the fair price for FX Euro/doUar in one year? Risk
free rates and spot exchange rate given.
QUESTION 2.26. An option pays
1,	
{ 0,	otherwise,
at timeT. If the volatility of 81 increases what happens to the value of the option?
   QuESrlON 2.27. In the pricing of options, why doesn't it matter if the stock price exhibits mean reversion?
    QUESTION 2.28. What are the limits/boundaries for the price of a can option on a non-dividend paying stock?

2.2. QUESTIONS	19

Qul3STION 2.29. What is the value of a call option for a 98th percentile faJI
in the stock price?
QuESTION 2.30. What is the price of a call option where the underlying is
the forward price of a stock?
    QuESTtON 2.31. Prove that the price of a call option is a convex function of the strike price.

2.2.3. Hedging and replication.
QuEsTION 2.32. What uses could an option be put to?
     QuBSTION 2.33. Suppose spot today is 90. A call option is struck at 100 and expires in one year. There are no interest rates.. Spot moves log-normally in a perfect Black-Scho]es world. I c1aim that I can hedge the option for free. Whenever spot crosses 100 in an upwards direction I borrow 100 and buy the stock Whenever spot crosses 100 in a downwards direction I sell the stock and repay my loan. At expiry either the option is out-of-the-money in which case I have no position or it is in-the-money and I use the 100 dollar strike to payoff my loan. Thus the option has been hedged for free. Where is the error in this argument?
    Que.sTION 2.34. Team A plays team B, in a series of 7 games, whoever wins 4 games first wins. You want to bet 100 that your team wins the series, in which case you receive 200, or O if they lose. However the broker only allows bets on individual games. You can bet X on any individual game the day before it occurs to receive 2X if it wins and O if it loses. How do you achieve the desired pay-out? In particular, what do you bet on the first match?
    Qul3STION 2.35. Suppose two teams play five matches. I go to the bookmakers and ask to place a bet on the entire series. The bookie refuses saying I can only bet on individual matches. For each match I either win X dollars or Jose X do1Jars. How would I construct a series of bets in such a way as to have the same payoff as a bet on the series?
     QUESTION 2.36. You want to bet $64 at even odds on the CWS winning the Wor1d Series. Your bookmaker will only let you bet at even odds on each game. What do you do?

20	2. OPTION PRICING

     QuEsTJON 2.37. Suppose an option pays 1 if tbe spot is between 100 and 110 at expiry and zero otherwise. Synthesize the option from vanilla call options.
    QuESTION 2.38. Suppose an option pays zero if spot is less than 100, or pays spot minus 100 for spot between 100 and 120 and 20 otherwise. Synthesize the option from vanilla options.
QUESTION 2.39. What is pricing by replication?

QUESTION 2.40. Rep1icate a digital option with vanilla options.

    QuESTION 2.41. The statistics department from our bank tell you that the stock price has fo11owed a mean reversion process for the last 10 years, with annual volati1ity 10% and daily vo1ati1ity 20%. You want to se11 a European option and hedge it, which voJatility do you use?

QUESTION 2.42. A derivative pays
1
min(max(Sr, K1) K2)'
with K1 < K2. Derive a mode] independent hedge in terms of a portfolio of
vanilla options.

2.2.4. The Greeks.

QUESTION 2.43. What methods can be used for computing Greeks given a
method for computing the price? \Vhat are their advantages and disadvantages?

QuESTION 2.44. How does the Gamma of a call option vary with time?

QussTJON 2.45. Suppose an option pays one if spot stays in a range Kl	to
K2 and zero otherwise. \Vhat can we say about the Vega?

   QussTJON 2.46. AU being equal, which option has higher Vega? An at-the­ money European call option with spot 100 or an at-the-money European call option with spot 200? (A structurer asked this question and didn't want formulas.)
     QUESTION 2.47. How do you construct a Vega neutral portfolio with vanilla call and put options?

2.2.. QUESTIONS	21

2.2.s. Genera].

QuESTlON 2.48. How accurate do you think a pricing function should be?

    QUESTION 2.49. Assume you have a good trading mode] that you think will make money. What information wou1d you present to your manage.r to support your claim.

2. .2.6. Trees and Monte Carlo.
   QuESnoN 2.50. A stock is worth 100 today. The.re are ze.ro interest rates. The stock can be worth 90 or 110 tomorrow. It move-s to 110 with probability p. Price a call option struck at 100.
   QuESnON 2.SL At the end of the dayt a stock will be 100 with probability p = 0.6 and 50 with probability 1 - p -  OA. What is 1t trading for right now? Value an at-the-money European cal] option expiring at the end of the day. What
if the actua] stock price is 75 right now?
   QuESTJON 2.52. A stock is worth 100 today. There are zero interest rates. The stock can be worth 90i 100, or 110 tomorrow. It moves to 110 with probability p and 100 with probability q. Wbat can we say about the price of a call option struck at 100.
     QuESTION 2.53. Follow-up: given that we have seen that trinomia] trees do not le.ad to unique prices, why do banks use them to compute prices?
    QUESTION 2.54. Consider the following binomial tree. There are two identical underlying assets A and B with the same prices and volatiJity. If all were the same except that research suggests company A will do better than company B, how would the option prices compare?
     QUESTION 2.55. Monte Car]o versus binomial tree - when shal1 you use one or the othe.r?
QuE-STION 2..56. Current stock price 100, may go  up to 150 or go down to
75.. What is the price of a call option based on it? What is the De1ta?
    QUESTION 2.57, Explain the Longstaff-Schwartz a]gorithm for pricing an ear]y exercisable option with Monte Carlo.

22	2. OPTION PRICING

2.2.7. Incomplete markets.
QuEsnoN 2.58. What is implied volatility and a volatility skew/smile?
   QuF.STION 2.59. What differing models can be used to price exotic foreign exchange options consistently with market smiles? What are th pros and cons of each?
QuBSTlON 2.60. Explain why a stochastic volatility model gives a smile.

2.3. Solutions

2. .3.1. Black-Scholes.
   Solution to Question 2.1. In the Black-Scholes world the evolution of the stock price St is given by

forµ, a > 0. We also assume the stock does not pay any dividends, there are no transaction costs and the continuously compounding interest rate is r > 0 (constant). The latter assumption implies the evolution of the risk-free asset Bt is given by
dBt = rBtdt.
   We are interested in pricing an option which is a function of the stock price at time T > 0, ST. One possible example is a call option with strike K > 0, that is a derivative which at time T pays
max(ST - K,0).
While the form of the payoff is not particularly important, that it is a function of the stock price at time T, and only time T, is important. Under this condition we can show that the call option price is a function of current time t and current stock price St only (see e.g. [16] p.267, Theorem 6.3.l or [6]). Thus we denote by C(t,St) the call option price.
   To price a derivative in the Black-Scholes world, we must do so under a measure which does not allow arbitrage (clearly the existence of arbitrage in any model is cause for concern). Such a measure is called a risk-neutral measure.

2.3. SOLUTIO S	23
One can prove that under this measure, the drift term of the stock price changes so that
   We are now ready to proceed with our derivation. In the risk-neutral world, C(t, St)! Bt is a martingale and hence if we calculate its differential we know it must have zero drift. Applying Ito's lemma to C(t, St) gives
8C	8C	I 82G	2
dC(t, St)= &dt + &St dSt + 2 &S; (dSt) ,
where the arguments of C and its partial derivatives are understood to be (t, St)- Using the risk-neutral dynamics of St (and recalling that (dWt)2 = dt, dWtdt = (dt)2 = 0) gives
aC	8C
dC(t, St)= ( 8t	&St rSt
Finally u ing the It<> product rule we can compute
C(t,St))-2-(&C	aC s   82C	2s2_	c)d	 St8CdW.
d (	Bt	-	Bt	at + &Srt	t	+ 2 8S; (7	t	r	t+(7 Bt &St	t·
Since we know this is a martingale (the drift term is zero), we see that
aC	aC	182C	2  2

(2.1)

at	&S/St + 2 &S;(7 St-	rC = 0.

This is the Black-Scholes equation.
   When considering the boundary conditions, we do need the form of the payoff function of the derivative. Here we take our example of the call option with strike K. We can approach the question regarding the boundary conditions in two ways. The first is simple, logical, but not entirely concrete: ju t think
about it. Consider first the boundary condition for St = 0. If the stock price at
time t is zero, it will be zero forever. To see this, either note that the stochastic differential equation for St become  dSt = 0 at time t, and hence the stock price
never changes, remaining at zero. Alternatively, recall the solution to the stock price stochastic differential equation is given by
Sr= S,exp { (r-10-2)  (T-t)	u(Wr- W,)},

24	2. OPTION PRlCING

so if St is zero then so is ST, Thus the call option will be worthless, and we have the boundary condition C(t,0) = 0, t E [O, T]. As a more concrete approach, if we substitute St= 0 into the Black-Scholes equation, we end up with
a&ct(t,0) = rC(t, 0).
Ilris is an ordinary differential equation which we can solve to give

We know C(T, 0) = max{O - K, O} = 0. This gives C(O, 0) = 0, and in turn
this implies C(t, 0) = 0 for all t.
   The boundary condition at St = oo is a little harder to specify. For very large vaJues of St, the option is a]most certain to finish in-the-money. Thus for every dollar the stock price rises, we can be almost certain to receive a dollar at payoff. time T. This is sometimes written as

lim	 SC (t, St)= 1.
S-·oo u  t
Alternatively, one can observe that as the option gets deeper and deeper into the
money, the optionality gets worth less and less so the boundary condition is that


for St large.
   Note this is only one way to derive the Black-Scholes equation and it is wise to know many ways. For further details on the Black-Scholes equation and related bac.kground, see [6].
Here are some possible related questions:

• If the payoff function is instead F(Sr) for some deterministic function
F, what are the boundary conditions at St= 02 and St= oo?
• Prove that the equation St = So exp { (r - 1/2l7 )t + uWt} satisfies the
stochastic differential equation given for St,
• Prove that the Black-Scholes formula for a European can option satisfies
the Black-Scholes equation.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	25
• Derive the equation if the stock pays continuous dividends at a rate d.
• Transform equation (2.1) into the heat equation using a change of variables.
?

   Solution to Question 2.2. What sort of undergrad are we dealing with here? Obviously there is a large difference between a student directly out of high school and one nearing the end of their studies in probability theory or financial mathematics. The best interpretation of this question is to give an explanation which is as simple as possible.
   One unavoidable, and somewhat technical, statement is that in the Black­ Scholes world the arbitrage-free stock price evolves according to the stochastic differentia1 equation
dSt = rStdt + o-StdWt,
where r is the risk-free rate of return (whether the undergrad understands much stochastic calculus is questionablet but short of giving a brief explanation of what the above equation repreBents there is 1itt1e we can do to avoid using this). Here you shou]d mention that 'arbitrage-free essentially implies that there does not exist opportunities to make money for nothing without any risk in the market. One could also give an elementary explanation of what this equation represents see the extension questions below. We require one other asset to use in the derivation, the risk-free bank account. This grows at the continuously compounding rate r and hence its value at time t1 Bt, is given by
Bt = ert	dBt = r Btdt,
which is a result from ordinary calcuJus.
   The final necessary piece of technical mathematics we require is Ito's formula: the stochastic differential equation of a function f (t, St) is given by
a1   .    a1    .   1 cP f   .   .  2
df(t}St) = at (t, St)dt + as (t, St)dSt +  as2 (t, St)(dSt) .
Evaluating this requires the relations (dt)2 = (dWt)(dt) = Ot (dWt)2 = dt. Here we can compare this result to those from ordinary calculus, noting the extra term as a consequence of differentiation using stochastic processes.

26	2. OPTION PRICING

   Next we state that the price of a derivative is a function of the current time t and the current stock price St (tWs can be proved, but is beyond the scope of the question). We therefore denote such a price by C(t,St).
    Finally we need that C(t,St)Bt-l is a martingale. How do we justify this, and what does it mean? A simple explanation of its meaning is that we expect it to have zero growth: our option price is expected to grow at the same rate as the bank account and hence the growth of each cancels out in the given process. This is what it means to be a martingale, we do not expect change over time so we have zero expected growth. We perhaps overused the word 'expected' here, but it should be emphasized that there will be changes in the discounted price, we just expect it to be .zero on average. This translate-s to the discounted price having a zero drift term. We apply Ito's formula to calculate the drift (see Question 2.1), equate to .zero and get

ac	ac	. 1 EPc 2	2

-a+t

-rSt+--cr S -rC=O
ast	·	2 as;	t	'


the Black-Scholes equation.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Give a non-technical explanation of the stochastic differentia1 equation describing the evolution of the stock price.
• What is the mathematical definition of arbitrage free'. Explain this in everyday language.

D

    Solution to Question 2.3. Exactly wha:t is meant by ·explain' thi.s equation is not entirely clear. We begin in the most obvious place., by stating the equation with an exp]anation of its terms. For a derivative paying a function of the stock price at some future time, the Black-Scholes equation is given by



2.3. SOLUTIONS	27
where

t is the current time1
St is the current stock price
C( t, St) is the price of the derivative)
r is the risk-free interest rate,
and a is the volatility parameter of the stock price,

(for a derivation see Question 2.1).
   This is a partial differential equation describing the, evolution of the option price as a function of the current stock price and the current time. The equation does not change if we vary the payoff function of the derivative, however the associated boundary conditions, which are required to solve the equation either in closed form or by simulation, do vary.
   An important part of this equation are the assumptions underlying its deriva­ tion. Perhaps most importantly, we assume that under the risk-neutral measure the evolution of the stock price is given by



As mentioned, we also assume the existence of a risk-free asset which grows at the continuously compounding rate r.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What are the boundary conditions needed to solve the equation associ­ ated with a payoff function f(Sr )?
• ExpJain the Ito formula.

?
   Solution to Question 2.4. The first part of this question asks us to compare the value of call options struck on two different stocks which have the same
volatility but different driftst that is the evolution of the stocks Sf and S; is

28	2. OPTION PRICING


given by


dStl


= µl S1t d·t + c,.St1 dWt,

dB;= µ2S;dt + c,S;dWt,

where µ1 =/- µ2. The answer is that despite their differing drifts, the prices of the options on the two stocks do not differ at all. The more interesting question is why they do not differ. Mathematically, we can consider the derivation of the Black-Scholes equation in Question 2.1. Here we see that the pricing of any derivative must be done in the risk-neutral measure in order to avoid arbitrage, and under the risk-neutral measure the drift of a stock is changed so that
dS; = rS;dt + aB;dWt,
for i = 1, 2, where r is the risk-free rate of return. Financially (from [6], Section 5.7), 'this reflects the fact that the hedging strategy ensures that the underlying drift of the stock is balanced against the drift of the option. The drifts are balanced since drift reflects the risk premium demanded by investors to account
for uncertainty and that uncertainty has been hedged away'. That is we can petfectly hedge the claim in the Black-Scholes world.
    We now consider a call option on a stock with downward jumps at random times compared to a model without jumps. In fact, we treat the more general case of an option with a convex payoff (a call option is such an example). We assume the usual Black-Scholes diffusion model for the stocks, with one having an additional jump term.
   To see how the prices compare. we carry out the Black-Scholes hedging strategy. This consists of an initial portfolio cost of CBs(O, So), where CBs denotes the Black-Scholes (no-jumps) option price, and holding 8 s units of the stock while the rest is in bonds. While a jump does not occur, the hedge works perfectly, and hence if no jumps occur the option's payoff is perfectly replicated.
   The convex payoff of the call option leads to a convex Black-Scholes price. This implies that if we graph the price as a function of spot for any time t, any tangent of the graph will lie below it. The above Black-Scholes hedge we set up is constructed to be exactly the tangent through the point (St,C8s(t,St)).

2.3. SOLUTlONS	29

When a jump occurs, we will move instantly along this tangent line, and hence finish at a point which is below the Black-Scholes price. We continue to hedge as before, and further jumps will add to this difference in the hedging portfolio and the Black-Scholes price. Hence if a jump occurs the portfolio value will be less than the Black-Scholes price.
   Overall, we constructed a portfolio with initial cost Cns(O, So) which some­ times finishes with the same value as the option (if no jumps occur) and sometimes finishes with a lower value (if a jump occurs). Thus by no arbitrage considerations the value of the option on the stock with jumps must be greater than C88(0,80).
For further information on pricing using a model with jumps, see [6] Ch.15. Here are some possible related questions:
• Say instead of two constant, but different, drifts, we had one constant drift and one drift that was a deterministic function of time. How wouJd the two option prices then compare?
• Is the jump model we considered a model which leads to a compJete market? What is the limiting price of an option on this stock as the jump intensity, which determjnes the frequency of jumps, approaches zero?
• Can we apply the same considerations in a jump model to other options,
for example a digital cal] option?
?

Solution to Question 2.5. Details of the following can be found in Section
6.llof[6].
   In a Black-Scholes world where the volatility follows a time-dependent (but still deterministic) function we can follow through the derivation of the Black­ Scholes equation as per usual (see Question 2.1), however now the volatility .c, is a function. This gives the modified versmon of the Black-Scholes equation,
8C	8C	l 82G	2  2

-a+t

-arsSt

t+--a(t) S- -rC=O
2	t	,

and the previous boundary conditions hold. From here it is not so clear how to proceed.

30	2. OPTION PRICING

   We instead consider pricing by using the martingale approach. Under the risk-neutral pricing measure, the evolution of the stock price is given by



or equivalently,


d{Iog S,) = (, - 1/2cr(t)2) dt + o-(t)dW,.


Our goal is to evaluate E(BT1C(T,ST)), where the expectation is taken in the risk-neutral measure, Bt is the value of the risk-free asset and C(t, St) is the value of the option at time t when the stock price is St. For this we need the distribution of ST, or equivalently log(ST). Th.e above equation is just shorthand
for
log Sr - log So = rT -	{T u(t)2dt + {T u(t)dWt.
2Jo	lo
If we recall some basic facts from stochastic calculus. we notice that for a
deterministic function f,	f(t)dWt is a normally distributed random variable with zero mean and variance J: f (t) 2dt. If we define a as the root-mean-square
va1ue of a{t)t i.e.

o-=


then we have

log ST - log So = (r - 1/2u2) T + a,/Tz,


where Z is a standard normal random variable. Here we notice that this is just the distribution at time T for the log of a geometric Brownian motion with constant volatility u, an.d we can price using this. For example, we have that the value of a European call option is just given by the Black-Scho]es formula with
a replaced by ii.
   To hedge, we hold t  units of stock at a time. The only difference is, what value of volatility do we use? At time t, C(t, St) is the value of the option with root-mean-square volatility taken over the time period [t,T], and this is the value
we use to find the hedge.

2.3. SOLUUONS	31

Here are some possible related questions:

• What changes if we use time-dependent drift?
• What changes if we use time-dependent interest rates?
• Where does the above argument break down if we introduce stochastic volatility?
?

   Solution to Question 2.6. The term 'in the Black-Scholes world; refers to the situation where the stock price St follows the stochastic differential equation

for µ,, a > 0 and where Wt is a Brownian motion. The question then asks us to compute, in the risk-neutral measure, the expectation
1E[max(S} - K,O)],
with appropriate discounting factors (a constant c-ontinuously compounding interest rate of r is assumed), where T is the maturity date and K is the strike price. The Black-Scho1es PDE is stm satisfied, with different boundary conditions, or you can use the more probabdistic approach of integrating the expectation against the appropriate density.
   However all of this is a lot of work, and a large short-cut exists if we stop and think about it for a second. In the risk--neutral measure., the stock price fo11ows the stochastic differential equation

The solution to this is weJl-known and given by
S,= Soexp	{ (r -o-2) t+o-W,}.
We are trying to price an option on S;, so what process does S; follow? One option is to apply Ito's formu]a, alternatively we, can look at the above expression and see immediately that
S'f = S6 exp	{ (2r - o-2) t + 2o-Wt} .

32	2. OPTION PRlCING

Comparing this with the original geometric Brownian motion, we have that in the risk-neutral pricing measure	is again a geometric Brownian motion with

diffusion 2u and drift 2r +

2
CY •

We can therefore use the B]ack formula. We simply have to write the S} as
FT(O)e-v2T/2+vWT,
compute the values of FT(O) and v and plug them in.
Here·are some possible related questions:

• 'Write down the boundary conditions satisfied by the new PDE.
• 'What are the Greeks of the option on S;?
?

   Solution to Question 2.7. The trick to answering this question is to take the stock as numeraire. The price of an option i.s given by its risk neutral expectation
Co=	lE[STma.x(ST- 	K,O),]
No	NT
where Co is the option price and No is a numeraire asset. By taking the stock as numeraire, NT = ST, we can simplify the expectation. We now just need to evaluate SolE[max(ST - K,O)] where the expectation is taken with the stock as numeraire. We can split this expectation into two parts

where ]. is the indicator function.. Focusing on the last term; we need to know how the final stock price is distributed in the stock measure. It is (try to derive this yourself}
Sp= 5'oexp{ (r +  )  T +o-v'TN(0,1)},
where N(O 1) is a standard normal random variable.. Since
lE[K]_sr>K] = KIP(ST > K),
we can calculate this to be KN (d1) where d1 is the same as in the Black-Scholes formula (see Section 6.13 of [6]).

2.3. SOLUTIONS	33
   Concentrating on the middle term in equation (2.2), we can rewrite the expectation as an integral

1E[Sr1Sr>K] = };,; [" exp{	 ;2} exp { (r +
with

)T +uv'Tx} dx,

l-	ln(f) - (r +  )T	
-	o-v'T	.
To calculate the expectation we perform the usual trick of putting all the x terms inside the exponential and completing the square. It turns out to equal (again, try it yourself)



where


d3-

ln(&)	(r	3f )T

-	o-v'T
So combining the expectations the price of an option paying max(Sr(Sr-K), 0)
in the Black-Scholes world is given by

with


Here are some possible related que tion :

• How will the price of this option compare to that of a European call?
• Why would a bank be reluctant to sell an option such as this?
?

2.3.2. Option price properties.
   Solution to Question 2.8. Figure 2.1 shows the value of vanilla call options with I year, 6 months and I day to expiry. It is unlikely you will sketch these graphs perfectly in an interview, however there are a few important features that should be preserved:

34	2. OPTION PRICING


FIGURE 2.1. Vanilla Call options of varying time to expiry with strike 100, volatiJity of 10% and a risk-free rate of 5%. The highest graph has 1 year to expiry, the lowest has 1 day.

• The vanilla call option value is monotone increasing in spot.
• The value is a convex function of spot, that is the price lies above all of the possible, tangent lines.
• A vanilla call option (on a non-dividend paying stock) with longer time to expiry than an equivalent option is always worth at least as much.
   As the last bullet point suggests, the option value decreases as time to expiry decreases and the value approache-s its payoff.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Sketch the value of a vanilla put option as a function of spot.
• Sketch the value of a digital caJVput option as a function of spot.
• Sketch the value of a vanilla call/put option as a function of volatility.

D

   Solution to Question 2.9. The short answer is that it is never optimal to early exercise an American call option (assuming the underlying stock does not pay dividends), but it can be optimal to early exercise an American put option.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	35

   For the American call option, consider a portfolio consisting of one option C and K zero coupon bonds B, which expire at time T. At time T if the non-dividend paying stock price S is above K then the portfolio will be worth
(ST -K)	+K	= ST,
If the stock price is below K the portfolio will be worth K. Therefore our portfolio is worth max{ST, K}, which is never less than the stock price and sometimes more. The principle of no arbitrage implies that the portfolio must be worth more than the stock at all previous times, giving
Ct+ KBt > St, Vt< T.

Rearranging, this yields


Ct> St-KBt.

Assuming interest rates are non-negative i.e. Bt < 1 we have
Ct> St-K,
which says that an option will always be worth more than its value if exercised immediately. Unfortunately there isn't an equivalent argument for put options, and there are times when the optionality value is worth less than receiving the payoff today and hence it is optimal to early exercise. For more details on optimal exercise times of American put options see (13].
Here are some related possible questions:

• What about when the stock pays dividends, is it ever optimal to early exercise an American option?
• What if there are negative interest rates?
• What can be said about the relationship between the price of European and American call options? Put options?
?

   Solution to Question 2.10. The answer to this question is not initially obvious if one is thinking about the quoted exchange rate, rather than what actually happens when the option is exercised. Consider an option on the AUDUSD exchange rate where AUD$1,000,000 is sold to buy USD$800,000 on the option's exercise date. This option could be considered both a call on USD and a put on AUD.

36	2. OPTION PRIClNG

   If we take the curre,nt exchange rate to be AUD$1 :!!! USD$0.75, the can option will have a strike of 0.80 and a notional of AUD$ l,0OO,0OO. The put
wUl have spot equal to 1.00, strike of 0.75/0.80 = 0.9375 and a notional of
AUD$800,000.
    After answering this and the previous question the interviewer may ask, why is it never optimal to early exercise the call when it is equivalent to a put, which can be optimally early exercised? The answer is that the notional amount in the foreign currency wil1 grow at its risk free rate, which is equ.ivalent to paying dividends and hence the optima] ear1y exercise arguments do not apply.
?

   Solution to Question 2.11. This question is designed to te-st one's basic feel for the price of an option. An easy way to answer is by using the approximation formula for at-the-money options. It states that an option's price is approximately
0.4Soav'T.
(The derivation of this formula can be found in [6].) To answer the question we need to know the volatility, which for simplicity we could assume to be 10%. The price of a one month at-the-money call option with million dollar notional and spot l is worth approximately $11,500.
He,re are some possible related questions:

• What is the approximate price of a put option with the same character­ istics as above? (Note that the approximation formula is the same for puts and calls as we are at-the-money, by put-call parity).
• How accurate is the approximation above?

?

   Solution to Question 2.12. Afte.r recognising the first option as a down-and­ out call, the vaJue should look something similar to the .increasing line in Figure 2.2, which is a sketch of a 1 year can with barrier at 95. The key :features are zero value for spot below the barrier, increasing va1ue with spot, and similarity to a vanma can option when far from the barrier.




70
8




.!!  a
a.

2.3.	LUTIO S	37
---,

e
6


01

Fro RE 2. .   d wn-and  ul barri r option in reasing Im  and a d  n• n •in barrier  pti n (hum ed lin ),  ith tri  100 and bar icr 95.



Th·
et	• Th
f,	m the rule

ption in Fi u	2.2 i	d wn-and-in call with th	am	p	m-
thi	question i	relating th	two va]u	which simply t II w

I out +· n = v	ma I




Th  tw
call opti
of 1~6).


aJ	wh n  dd d l	th r sh	ld J	k th
2.1). To . ee why thj	relation hip h Ids

m	po  ibl	11 ated	u	ti n :

m as	anilla
ectJ n	.1


• Why . hould	ut + in =	anil1a?
• Sk tch th	value of a	all option with	barri r ab v	h,	trik .	p-
pro imat I	what will th			Delta and  wh ·n th		i clo	th	ie ?

?

38	2. OPTION PR1CING

   Solution to Question 2.13. Put-ca11 parity state-s that a European call option minus a European put option, with the same underlying asset, strike price and time to maturity, is equal to the forward contract. Using C for call, P for put and F for the forward contract we have


   Put-call parity is a very useful concept in options pricing and it is model independent, so it must hold no matter which model one is working with. Put-call parity could be usedt for examplet to price a put option instead of the required call option. due to the fact a put option is sometimes easier to pdce as its payoff is bounded. The parity gives the call option from the calculated put and forward contract. It can also be used to prove that the drift of the underlying asset does not affect the price of an option.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Does put-call parity hold for options with early exercise features, e.g.
American options?
• Prove put call parity.

?

   Solution to Que lion 2.·t4. There are at least two ways to answer this question, however the first is preferred as .it does not assume any underlying model.
   The price of a vanilla can option is monotone increasing in volatility, so as volatility tends to infinity the option price will tend to its maximum value. We know that the upper bound for the price of a call option is the stock price, so as volatility tends to infinity the price of a call option tends to the stock price.
    The second method of answering this question is to assume we are in a Black-Scholes world, with the option price given by the Black-Scholes fonnula. We can then argue that as volatility tends to infinity


d=i

log( j} + (r +	)T	t
aff'


as a ---+ oo.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	39

Similarly,

log( ) +(r - (]"2 )T
d2 =	K 	./T	2	-+  -oo	as er -+	oo.
(J	T
The corresponding normal cdf of d1 and d-2wi.11 then be I and 0 respectively.
So as volatility tends to infinity the option"s price will tend to the spot price.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What happens to the price of a vanilla ca11 option as volatility tends to zero?
• What happens to the price of a vanilla call option as time to expiry tends to infinity?
?

   Solution to Question 2.15. The key to this question is relating the American optionality of option A to the European optionality of option B in terms of probabilities. Clearly if option B pays a dollar then option A must also, but the converse is not true. Thus A must be worth more than B. For example, assume that the stock follows Brownian motion. As there are no interest rates this Brownian motion will have zero drift in the risk-neutral measure. If the stock reaches 30 before expiry, then in the risk-neutraJ measure there is a 50% chance it will be above 30 at expiry. In terms of the two options, if A pays off there is a 50% chance B will pay off, therefore.B will be worth half the value of A.
   If we were to assume that the stock follows Geometric Brownian motion it will have a negative drift in the case of zero interest rates (due to the -c/2T/2 term). We no longer have that option B is worth half the value of option A, it
will be worth less than ha1f the value of A. He.re is a related question:
• In general, what can we say about the value of American digital options compared to European digitaJ options?
?

40	2. OPTION PRJCING

   Solution to Que tion 2.16. We will take the underlying asset to be non­ dividend paying and consider two arbitrary expiry times T1 and T2 with



Take an American option C1 which expires at time T1 and an American option C2 expiring at time T2. C2 carrie all the rights of C1, because it can be exercised at any time before T1 and it also carries extra rights, because it can be exercised after T1 wherea C1 cannot. Therefore C2 must be worth at least as much as C1 as the extra rights will have a non-negative value.
   We have shown that a time to expiry increases the option value increases, which makes intuitive sense as extra time gives us more optionality, which our bank/broker will no doubt charge us extra for.
   Note this argument applies equally well to European call option since they wi11 have the same value a American can option (see Question 2.9).
Here are  ome possible related questions:

• Prove this result for European options without using American options.
• Will this relationship always hold for European options on dividend­ paying assets?

?

   Solution to Question 2.17. This is a strange question, but interviewers tend to like asking curly questions. Put-can parity holds even though the value of a call is unbounded. One could argue that it doesn't matter that the can value is unbounded, the put and caJJ must have the same value by put-call parity.
   Another approach is to discuss how options are priced. The price of a derivative i given by the integral of the payoff multiplied by the risk-neutral density, then discounted. The payoff for a call option is unbounded, however when this is multiplied by the risk-neutral den ity it will be bounded. This is because the risk-neutral density wi11 rapidly decay to zero for any reasonable model.

2.3. SOLUTIO S	41
Here are  ome po	ible related que tions:

• What is the rate of decay of the Black-Scholes density?
• What doe  it mean for a model to have fat tails?
• Suppose we worked in the Bachelier model, what would happen?
?

Solution to Que tion 2.18. The que tion can be divided into:

• What effect doe skew have on the price of a digital option?
• What skew arises in a normal model?

All volatility smile questions about European options with single time payoffs,
i.e. option	that pay f (Sr) at time T, are best re olved by using replication argument .
   We can replicate a digital call option using a limit of call spreads. Thu we take for some small E, 0.5/E call options struck at K - E and -0.5/E call options struck at K + . The value of this portfolio is equal
C(K - E) -  C(K  +c)
2

Letting	tend to zero, we get

ac
oK·

This is the value of the call option a a function, if we have a smile and we are u ing Black-Scholes values with implied volatility, a, we must consider
_   i_ (BS(K  A))=_ BBS _ aBs aa.
8K	,u	8K    8a  8K
The fir t term i the price in a model with no smile, that is a log-normal model. Since Vega i alway positive for a vanilla call option, the correction i po itive for downwards sloping smiles and negative for upward sloping ones.
   A normal model can be crudely written as a log-normal model with volatility u / S. The volatility therefore goes up when pot goe down and we have a negative kew.

42	2. OPTION PRICING
   In conclusion, the price of a digital call optJon wm increase when we switch from a log-normal model to a normal one. See [6], Chapter 7 for further discussion of the issues raised in this example.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What happens with a digital put? (This is trivial!)
• Can you think of a case where the correction would be negative?
• What about a double digital?
?

   Solution to Question 2.19. The Delta of a cal] option is always between zero
and one. The Delta of a stock is always one. The risk of the stock is therefore always bigger; this is, however, misleading in that the value of the stock is
generally much, much higher than that of the option. If we put an our money
into stocks or call option , it is the can option portfo1io that would be riskier.
   Recall that the Delta of a call option is N(d1). After we divide by the Black-Scholes value, we have to compare
N(d1)	and 1
StN(d1) - Ke-r(T-t)N(d2)	St
Since N(d2) :is always positive, the first of these is bigger than the second, and
so the Delta as a fraction of the value is bigger.
   Why is the Delta the correct quantity to observe? If we are not Delta-hedged then the main component of our profit and loss when spot moves by Swill be
As· 8Value
.u. x	as	·
Here are some possible related questions:

• What about put options?
• What about a portfolio of calls and puts?
• Can you derive the Delta of a can option?
?

2.3. SOLUTIONS	43

   Solution to Question 2.20. One of the most important results in mathematical finance is that option prices are given as their pay off integrated against a risk­ neutral probability density and then discounted. For the price of a European call
e-rT i:ma.x(Sr - K,O)p(Sr)dSr,
where p is the risk-neutral density. We will assume the interviewer has given us the risk-neutral distribution for the stock price and that interest rates are zero. Note that we can write
Sr= So+ aN(O,1),
where N(O, 1) is a standard normal random variable. Also, we have that the option is at-the-money, so K = So. The call option price is equal to
1'L.	max(So + ax - So, O)e-2 dx.
V 21r	-oo
The integrand will be non-zero if and only if x > 0, so we can rewrite this as
to=.	axe-Tdx.
v21r	o
All we need to do now is note that
d	x2	x2
-e-2	-xe-2 dx

and we obtain


/'-ha	[

00
e-2:z:2]
0


-	/'h.

Compare this to the approximation for an at-the-money European call option
in Question 2.1 J, which assumed a log-normal distribution for the underlying stock price. As l/v'21r 0.4, we now see how the rough relationship between log-normal and normal models came about in Question 2.18.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What are some of the practical flaws with pricing call options in this model?
• Suppose the two models give the same price at the money, how will the prices below the money compare?

44	2,. OPTlON PRICJNG

• Why is the relationship between normal and log-normal models above only approximate?
• How good will the approximation between normal and log-normal models be? Consider at-the-money and out-of-the money options.
?

   Solution to Question 2.21. We will use the result of the previous question, where the at-the-money call option price, C was given by
C =   !!_ .

It now straightforward to see that volatility is found by multiplying the price by
.;Im.
Here are some possible related questions:
• Assuming a Black-Scholes world, if we know the stock price and the price of a 1 year at-the-money European call, how can we estimate CT?
• How would you estimate a if you had no option price information?
?
   Solution to Question 2.22. Assuming zero interest rates the option will be worth 20/3 (for working see Question 2.51).
Here are some possible :related questions:

• 'Why should the probabilities be 2/3 and 1/3?
• Price the same European call but with a strike of 90 and l 10.
• What if the probabilities were 1/ 4 and 3/ 4?
?
   Solution to Question 2.23. For a sketch of a vanilla can see Figure 2.1 and for a digital call see Figure 2.3. When re]ating the two graphs the key features are:
• As spot increases the slope of the ca11 option price increases until it
approaches a constant slope of 1. However, the digital call option price

2.•·	OLITTIONS	5




. 10	RE 2.	Digital call option wHb . trike I 00, volatility  10%
ri	free rat	5% aod I year to expiry.


fl tt n	ut as the option approa h	deep in-the-money. This is caused
by the di itaJ pay ff being capped at I.
• A vanilla calJ option · price i conv	, a digital call is n t.. Th	digital call 1001	lik	a	m	lativ  distribution f n tio,.

He1 is a related qu	tion:

• Pl t a digital put on the  ame graph as a digital cafl. ' or what value of
pot will the tw :ltine i t rsect?



   Solution to Que tton 2.24.	o value this forwant w	need to remember th imple formula fo, the rward price at time To	a non•d:ividend paying stock
c,	rT
I''	0

When th	tock pay		i	d·	id	d,· . 6 m nths tim	b	p· ice	will drop by th di idend amoun	we need to take thi int	a	OOfitt in the forward. ri	. Wi

46	2. OPTION PRICING

simply just subtract the suitably accumulated dividend amount, giving

FT	SoerT - der(T-Td)'
=	leo.05 _ O.leo.os(o.s),

giving a forward price of 0.95.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Why is the forward price of a stock equal to the formula above? (Think
in terms of a forward contract.)
• Why do some banks price options using the forward price instead of the spot price? (Hint: interest rates.)
• Adjust the forward price for a continuous dividend rate.

D

   Solution to Question 2.25.. This question is simply asking what the forward foreign exchange rate is between the Euro and US dollar. We can work out what the forward rate should be by thinking in terms of investing the current spot exchange rate for one year.
   We assume that the current exchange rate between the two currencies is S. How could we lock in the exchange rate in one years time? Consider buying 1 US dollar today, which has been bought by borrowing S Enros. This portfolio will have zero value. In one years time the US dollar amount wi1l have grown by the US interest rate, d, and the loan will have grown by the Euro interest rate, r. As the portfolio bad zero initial value, it must have zero future va]ue (otherwise an arbitrage opportunity exists).
Putting the value in one yearts time into equation form
0 = (1 + d) - S(l + r), and thus
		1+r
1-	81+ d.
So the original 1 US do11ar has turned into S(t + r)/(1+d) and this is the fair forward foreign exchange rate.

2.3. SOLUTIO S	47

Here are some possible related questions:

• If the forward price was trading above this amount, set up an arbitrage portfolio.
• If the forward price was below, set up an arbitrage portfolio.
• Do you think that forward prices are good predictors of future exchange rates?

?

   Solution to Question 2.26. This option is similar to a Margrabe option, but with a digital payment. A Margrabe option pays ma.x(S1(t) -S2(t),0), for more details see Section 11.6 of [6].
   To answer this question we will make a few simplifying assumptions: the volatility of S2 does not change and the correlation between S1 and S2 is zero. We have two situations to consider, S1(t) > S2(t) and S1(t) < S2(t), that is we are currently either in or out-of-the-money.
   If we are in-the-money then an increase in the volatility of S1 wiJI create a higher probability in the risk-neutral world of finishing below S2, so the option price will decrease. If we are out-of-the-money, then the extra volatility is good for those long the option as it means S1 is more likely to finish above S2 so the option value will increase.
Here are some possible related questions:

• We now take the correlation between S1 and S2 to be non-zero. What af­ fect will correlation have on the price of the option, assuming everything else remains constant?
• How  ensitive will the value of this option be to interest rate ?

?

Solution to Question 2.27. A possible mean reversion process for a stock i



4S	2. OPTION PRICING

where a is the mean rever ion rate and µ is the long term mean. These are the real world dynamics of the stock proces , but to price an option we are only interested in the risk-neutral dynamics. When we move to the risk-neutral dynamics the drift of the stock becomes rdt as we saw in Question 2.1. Therefore the real world drift, be it mean reverting or not, does not change the price of the option.
Here are some possible related que tions:

• What is the financial interpretation if the drift of a stock is equal to r?
• When changing between probability measures, what happen	to the volatility?

?

   Solution to Question 2.28. We have already seen that the price of a European call option on a non-dividend paying stock is always more than its intrinsic value, see Question 2.9. What about the upper bound? A can option gives the holder the right, but not the obligation to purcha e a  tock at a future point in time. So at expiry the mo t we can hold is one stock. Therefore the option cannot be worth more than the tock price as our maximum payoff is the tock price.
The price bounds for a European call Ct on a non-dividend paying stock St
with strike K are



where Bt is the price of a zero-coupon bond expiring at the same time as the option.
Here are some possible related que tion :

• If we denote a call option by C(K,T), where K is the trike and T is the expiry, what can we ay about the function C in terms of K?
• What can we say about C(K,T) in terms of T? (A sume non-dividend paying stock.)

?

2.3. SOLUTIONS	49

   Solution to Question 2.29.. This question relates to the concept of Value at Risk (VAR), which is the key measurement for the risk in a bank's trading book. If applying for a job in Risk Management it is very important that you know what VAR is and that you also know some of the common calculation methods, see [8] or [4].
   To answer the questmon we will need to assume a distribution for the stock price. We will work in the Black-Scholes world where the stock is distributed as

where N(O,1) is a standard normal random variable... Finding the 98th percentile move in the stock requires looking up the value where 98 percent of the standard
normal's probability Hes above this value. Using the inverse normal the value is -2.05. We will assume some initial market values So= 100, r = 0, T = L and o- = 0.1. Using these parameters the price of call option with strike 100 is
3.99. using the Black-Scholes formula.
   We now calculate the 98th percentile fall in th.e stock price over the coming year. If the stock price fell this much it would be worth
l00exp(0.5(0.12) + 0.1(-2.05)) = 81.03.
This translates to the call option being worth a measly 0.06.
Here are some possible related questions:

• How would the 98th percentile move in the stock price vary with time?
• What if the stock had a distribution with 'fatter tails' than a log-normal distribution. Would the value of the call be more or less?

?

   Solution to Question 2.30. The option's price is given by the Black formula, which is derived in a similar way to the Black-Scholes formula, but instead we assume the forward price follows a geometric Brownian motion (try the derivation for yourselt). If we denote the forward price of the stock as F, the

50	2. OPTION PRICING

call price, C, is given by
C = e-rT [FN(d1) - KN(d2)],
where
log (f) + (-l)i-l1/2o-2T
=	o-v!T	'
and N() denotes the standard Normal cumulative distribution function. The Black formula is commonly used in interest rate markets to price swaptions and caps.
Here is a related question:

• What is the benefit of pricing an option on the forward instead of the spot? (Hint: interest rates.)
?
Solution to Question 2.31. The following is based on the proof in Section
2.8 of [6].
    To prove the can option is a convex function of the strike price we consider th.e price as a function of strike, and prove that a line joining any two points on the graph of this function lies on or above the graph. This i a necessary and sufficient property of convex functions.
   Let C(K) denote the call option price as a function of strike K. Then this i equivalent to saying, for K1 < K2,
(2.3)	0C(K1) + (1 - B)C(K2) > C (BK1 + (1 - B)K2),
for all O < 0 < l.
   The important thing to note here is that the final payoff is convex in strike for a fixed value in the underlying, that is the function

is convex in K. With this in mind, consider a portfolio long 0 call options struck at K1, long (1 - 0) options struck at K2 and short one option struck at 0K1 + (1 - 0)K2 (all options with the same maturity). Since the final payoff is

2.3. SOLUTJONS	51

convex in strike, (2.3) holds at the expiry of the options and we therefore have that our portfolio has non-negative value at expiry. This implies, by no-arbitrage considerations, that the portfolio must be of non-negative value at all times before expiry, and hence (2.3) holds at these times and we have proved convexity of the can option price.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Sketch the shape of the value of a call option as a function of strike.
• Prove that a portfolio with non-negative value at expiry must have non-negative value at all times before expiry.
• What other property (besides the one used in the proof above) does a convex funct1on have?
• In the Black-Scholes model, prove the call option price is a convex
function of spot.

?

2.3.3. Hedging and replication.
   Solution to Question 2.32. The short answer to any question about participa­ tion in the financial markets is that there are three sorts of behaviours:

• hedging,
• speculation,
• arbitrage.

   A hedger uses financial products to reduce risk. For example, an exporter who is paid in foreign currency may use an option to guard against the possibility that the exchange rate moves against h:im.
   A speculator talces on risk with the belief either that the compensation for the additional risk makes it worthwhile or because he bas specific views on how an asset will behave, and the product allows him to make a profit from these views if they are correct.
   An arbitrageur exploits mis-pricing in the marke,t, and makes money by buying risk in one place and selling it in another.

52	2. OPTION PRICING

Here are some possible related questions:

• Which category do you think most participants in the market fall into?
• Which category do you think this bank falls into?
• Which category do you think personal investors fall into?

?

   Solution to Question 2.33. This is a tricky one in that you often find that the questioner does not really understand the problem either.
   The fundamental problem is that the hedging strategy is not well defined. For example, when you first touch l 00, how do you know whether the stock will go up or down? It is not clear at that time whether 100 will be crossed so you
cannot kn.ow what to hold. Thus you really need to buy at 100 + E and sell at
100- t. You then lose 2t for each crossing, and the strategy is no longer riskless.
   The properties of Brownian motion actually make the problem worse. If it hits a level then it will hit it again infinitely often in an arbitrarily small amount of time. So even in retrospect, it's hard to know when the crossing occurred.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Do you think this would be an effective approach in practice?
• Does the fact that you do not know which way the stock would go when it hits 100 make sense financially?

D

   Solution to Question 2.34. The key to this sort of the problem is to identify which sort of option pricing problem it is equivalent to. Here we have a digital option that pays +100 if A win 4 or more matches and -100 otherwise.
   The underlying is simply a random walk that goes up or down one at each step. So in option pricing terms, the question is how do you replicate a digital option on a 4-step symmetric binomial tree? Once you have identified this fact it should be easy.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	53
   We can compute the hedge at the first step by computing the va1ue in the up and down states. In the up state, the value will be 100 times the probability of 3 or more up moves out of six Jess 100 times the probability of 2 or fewer. The probability of 3 or more up moves is equal to one minus the probability of 2 or less up moves: using binomial coefficients. this is equa] to
1)6	42	21
1 - (2	(1+ 6 +15) = 64 =  32.

The value in the up state is therefore
100 X Zl - 100 (1 -

21) .

32	32
The va]ue in the down state is the negative of this by symmetry.
The bet we place on the first match is therefore
42



and we are done.

100 X 32

- 100 = 31.25,


Here are some possible related questions:

• Work out the entire betting strategy.
• What if there were only 5 matches?
• Cou1d you do this if the sizes of a11 bets had to be decided in advance of the series?
?
Solution to Question 2.35. See Question 2.34.	?
Solution to Question 2.36. See Question 2.34.	?

   Solution to Question 2.37.. One can dearly not do this precisely since call options are continuous and the double di.gital option which we are being asked to replicate is not
   However, there is a standard approach to replicating jumps which is to use a call spread. Let C(K) denote a ca11 option struck at K. We pick a small t > 0,

2. OPTJON PRICING


FmuRB 2.4. Option payoff profile


and take


1/E of C(l< -  E:) and - 1/t  of C(K)..

Outs:id	d	interval K - t: to K thms match	a djg"fal caU option truck at/(.
Sofor this prob m we take 1 /	of die folllowing prutfolio:
• A call optiiem soock at l.1 0 -  E.
,. M. us 1 caU option struc	al 100.
,. Mi u 1 cal option stn1ct at 110.
,. Acau!JI option stmck at . 10 + .
    Figure 2.4 .shows the r-e(P1icati ng portfo io with me soUd Jines ;and the doub]e djgital optio	with the doHed lines.
Here are som.e posru'ble related questions:
• Wou[d the p ice for your portfolio be hig ·er or ]ower thar the true price.
• How would yoo get a portful' o tbat was a close approximatio,non the
oppos·w s'de'?
• Must the price of' w . portfoho conv tod· e true pno · as ,e: -+  O?
i(See Chapter 6 of [6].)

D

















ti.

5





F10 R	2.5. :Pay ff pr fil	f r Q


     lution to Qu	ti	2.		. Th		thi			rt of pro 1 m i	t	id n jfy that the payoff i a straight line which chang		 gradient at various point . Every time y u n ed to change gradient by x you add				all option . If there are jump then you use	all prea		a in	uestion	. 7. I there i	va u	wh n pot equal zero th ·n y u		n use pu	pti				up n b n		.
For tlli	
• +1	radi nt	l 1
• -1	radient	120
• no jump,
• n	alue wh	ual	7-.e


o r po tfi Ji	i	ption	tru	at 10	and minu
1gure 2.5 pl ts th	payoff profil .
Hrcar	m
• yntl	iz.e a pa	f	-  10

tru k at	20.

• nthe ire a	ay ff	f zero for	' <	0  linearl	in rea ing t	2) at 1
then ba k to zero at 110 and zero abo	110.
?

56	2. OPTION PRICING

   Solution to Question 2.39. Pricing by replication invo1ve-s trading in financial instruments in such a way as to match the payoff of another instrument that is most likely exotic. For example,. a barrier option can be priced using a portfolio of vanilla options whose payoff matches that of the barrier option. See Section
10.2 of [6] for details. One of the main benefits of pricing exotic options by (statjc) replication with vanil1a options is that the exotic will be priced in a way that is consistent with the current volatility smile.
   There are two main types of replication methods that one should be aware of: static and dynamic. Static replication involves setting up a portfolio today and then not having to do any further trading (or at most trading on a finite number of future date-s). Dynamic replication involves continuously trading in the underlying and is the method required to hedge an option using the stock and bond in the Black-Scholes model.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What are some of the practical problems of dynamic replication?
• Given the choice between two different static re,plica:.ting portfolios that match an option's payoff, what crite-ria would you use to decide between the two?

?
Solution to Question 2.40. See Question 2.37.	?
   Solution to Question 2.41. As we know from Question 2.14, European call and put options are monotone increasing in volatility, so if we use the lower volatility we will underprice the option. Which volatility do we use? The choice becomes clear when we think about how we would actually hedge the short position in this option.
   We will assume we are in the Black choles world and therefore will dynamically (or a:t least daily) hedge our option position. Due to the frequent hedging we are exposed to daily volatility and we must use the 20% volatility to price the option.

2.3. SOLUUONS	'S7

Here are some possibt	r lated queStions.:
• What wou d h ppe:n if we lbougW: ,an •option off' .a bank using tn·· 10% volaitiWity?
• · What if we could static.ally hedge the optiJon tod ayl does this chan
which volallility we t1Jse?·







Solution to,Question 2.42 Vfhen try n1g t,o, rq:,Uc.ate a derivartive the best way



F1c. , R 2.1fi	The derivatjve's payoff in Qnesrion 2.42..


t,o start is by sketching its patyoff. For this. derivative .il is easwer to think •of the denominator on its ,own ·th.en consider the a'.UJal payoff. Th d· nomina r will pay K1 for Sr < K1 then llcrease1neady nti] ST > .K2 w ere Hs payoff wm
be K2• Th-e actual payoff wi	be d'te inve· e of this. w!h oo wm look · o ·	_hing like Figure 2.6.
The pay ff is not 1inear between J( 1 aud K'l.i therefore we wUJ not be able
:to exact1y replLea.tie it with vanilla oplions, but we can get dose. If we make

58	2. OPTION PRIClNG

the approximation that the payoff is linear between K1 and K2 and use the techniques discussed in Question 2.38 our replicating portfolio will contain
• 1/ K 1 zero coupon bonds expiring at time T
• a call option st·ruck· at K1 wi·th· notional a= (l/KK:z2}--K(l1/Ki).• and
• and a call option struck at K2 with notional -a.
   This approximation will be good for K1 close to K2, but will deteriorate as the two values of Kare further apart
   There are two ways to improve our replicati.on. We can either select a finite number of points in the interior and then do piecewise straight lines between them, or we can write the. payoff as a continuous super-position of options. In the second case, we have an uncountably infinite number of options but can replicate precisely. The key is that the second derivative of a call option with respect to strike is a delta function.
Here are some possible .related questions:

• What is the final stock value that will result in the maximum error from our replicating portfolio? What is the error?
• Improve the approximation of the replicating portfolio between K 1 and
K2.
• Say you can no longer trade zero coupon bonds. Change the replicating portfolio below K1 using only vanilla options.
?

2.3.4. The Greeks.
   Solution to Question 2.43. There are many different ways to compute the Greeks, but we will focus our answer on three popu]ar methods:
• finite-difference approximations,
• pathwise method;
• likelihood ratio method.

Finite-difference approximations involve calculating the price for a given value of a parameter, say spot, then changing the parameter value slightly, by E, and

2.3. SOLUTIONS	59

recalculating the price. If we let / be the payoff and 0 the parameter we are interested in, an estimate of the sensitivity will be
= f(0+f.)-f(0)_
€
This method has the advantage that it is easy to implement and does not require too much thought, apart from choosing an appropriateŁ. It is howevert a biased estimate of the sensitivity. This bias can be reduced by using a central-difference
estimator
;Q=.	/(0 + t) -  /(0 -  €)
2i	'
although we will now have to calculate three prices (as we usually have to calculate
/(8)), which could become slow. There is also an issue with discontinuous payoffs, For example, if we want to estimate the Delta for a digital call we wiJI get being zero except for the small number of times when it wiH be 1. For these paths our estimate of .b.. will then be very big, approximately of the order t-1.
    The pathwise method gets around the problem of simulating for diffe.rent val­ ues of 0 by first differentiating the option's payoff and then taking the expectation under the risk-neutral measure
.b.. = e-rT	f'(0r)<b(0T,0o)d0r
where ID is the density of (J in the risk-neutral measure. The pathwise method has a few advantages: it is an unbiased estimate, only requires simulation for one value of 0 and is usually more accurate than a finite-difference approximation. It
does become more complicated when the payoff is discontinuous (e.g. digital or barrier options), but to get around this we can write f = g + h, with g continuous
and h piecewise constant.
    The likelihood ratio method is simj]ar to the pathwise method, but instead of differentiating the payoff we differentiate the density <P
= e-rT	f(0r): (0r)<I>(Or )d0r,
where w is the derivative of ·'1>by 8. One advantage with the likel.ihood ratio method is that only one value of (J needs to be simulated to calculate both the price and the sensitivity. We also do not need to worry about discontinuities in the payoff function as we are are differentiating the density. The main disadvantage

60	2. OPTION	R.I	.

with thi	m thod i	needin	t	e plicitly kn	th	den ity.	or more detail
garding the	th	m thod.  see	h pter 7 of f4 J.
Here are som	ibl	related qu	ti ns:

• What is the likelihood	·o in the Bltl1	'chol	mod ·l?
• What is Malliavia calculus?
• Why might imp rtan	·arnplin	h lp?

D


olution t Que tion	.44. The Gamma of an o. tion i th·	ond deriv liv


F10 RE	.7.	b ·	amrna of"'	anill		tru	a 100 as a function of po 11	vru:yi n	e piri	in years).

of th  pri  with r  pect to  p t, or the derivative  f the  pti n s Delta. We a.nnot  pe l to draw the Gamma perfectJy in an int r i w howev r it ·hould J  k imilar to  igu  2.7. Th   y  atu11  ar :
• the Gamma fi r a Jong p	ition in a	aom	all o put option i	alway positive;
• a	th	option	maturity approaches, the Gamma will become more
·piked at the strike price.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	61
The positivity of Gamma is due to call and put options being convex function of	pot as the second derivative for any convex function is po itive. Why does the Gamma become more spiked as maturity approaches? If we think about the option'	Delta for	hort maturities, it will behave almost like a step functio , jumping from zero below the strike to one above it. The derivative of Delta wiJJ reflect this jump and therefore produce a spiked Gamma.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What does the Gamma express in terms of hedging co t ?
• Is it possible to have an option with zero Gamma?
• Why do call and put options have the same Gamma?

?

   Solution to Que tion 2.45. This option, known as a double no-touch, will have a negative Vega. Vega measures the change in option price for a I% change in volatility. If volatility increases then the probability in the risk-neutral measure of hitting either barrier Kl or K2 increases and so the option price will decrease, giving a negative Vega.
Here are  ome po  ible related questions:

• What about the Vega for a double one-touch?
• Sketch the Vega for a digital call option and explain its features.

?

   Solution to Question 2.46. One way to answer thi question is to firstly think about how the values of the two options differ. Both of the e options are at-the-money, so doubling the value of spot will double the strike and hence the value of the option, the factor of two multiplies through. Therefore the option with pot 200 (option B) will be worth twice as much as the option with spot 100 (option A).
   The Vega of option B will be twice the Vega of option A, as the two will multiply through the Vega as well.

62	2. OPTION PRICING

Here are some po sible related question :

• What happens when the spot of each option move	by say 10%, will the relationship between the Vegas change?
• Consider the same two options, what can we ay about the difference between the Gammas?

?

   Solution to Question 2.47. Firstly we need to know what the current Vega of the portfolio is. The Vega for the portfolio will be the sum of all the individual instrument's Vegas, so we find these and add them up. If this value is non-zero we will have to use an option to make it zero. We can use either a call or put as the Vega of a vanilla call is the ame a a put, due to put-call parity and the forward contract having zero Vega.
   We take an option which expires at a similar time to the portfolio and find its Vega. We then buy/sell enough of these options to make the Vega of our portfolio zero.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Assuming Black-Scholes and given our portfolio is now Vega neutral,
wi11 it be Gamma neutral?
• If we don't believe in Black-Scholes wi11 our portfolio be Gamma neutral if it is Vega neutral?

?

2.3.5. General.
   Solution to Question 2.48. There are many ways to answer this question. The answer the interviewer was looking for was lE - 4, that is one basis point Another approach is to consider the uncertainty in the inputs. For example, volatility i estimated rather than observed so an error that is small compared to one Vega is sufficient.

2.3. SOLUTIO S	63

   One could also mention that it is error as a fraction of the uncertain part of the price that is important, not as a fraction of the total price. For example, a deeply-in-the-money option is almost all intrinsic, it is the estimate of the value of the optionality that matters.
Here are some possible related questions

• How much is the vega on a one-year at-the-money caJl option if the stock price is 100?
• If your were model were inaccurate, how would you spot the fact?
?

   Solution to Question 2.49. We will answer this question assuming two different models. Firstly we consider a statistical arbitrage model and then secondly assuming we have a model for pricing exotic derivatives.
   Statistical arbitrage involves exploiting small mispricings in the market, usually by buying and selling stocks to create a portfolio which has minimal risk, but potential for profit. This portfolio of stocks will often be very large, and thus requiring a large amount of computational power. Therefore one aspect of a good model is that it returns trade information in a useful time frame.
   What other information would you use to prove your model is a good one? A good check is to back-test the model, seeing how the trades it suggested actually worked on historic data. One could then argue if it made money in the past it should make money in the future. An important test is that it should work "out of sample" that is if we train on a set of data then it should work on real data that it has not been trained on.
   Typically, statistical arbitrage (also known as "stat arb" or "stab art") works well in normal times but fails when turbulence occurs. You therefore might want to demonstrate that it still works in a period of turbulence. If you could prove that your model not only makes money in benign markets, but it also does well during a market crash, then your manager will no doubt be interested to hear more.
   Another point to consider is whether the trading strategy takes into account bid-offer spreads and other transaction costs. It is easy to find strategies that

64	2. OPTION PRICING

work when these are ignored, and this will be one of the first things your boss seizes upon.
    A related issue is liquidity. Many funds and most spectacuJarly, LTCM, have fai]ed because of a sudden liquidity drought. How much money wiU your strategy lose in such a case?
   Now considering exotic derivatives; the first piece of evidence to present would be that your model reproduces the prices of basic instruments. If the model cannot accurat.ely price vanilla options and discount bonds, then traders will need a lot of convincing that it will price exotic instruments correctly.
   The second piece of evidence to present comes down to what a model should actually do. Apart from giving prices, a model's main purpose is to suggest a hedging strategy. Therefore. a new mode] that provides more accurate hedging ratios; wm be popular automaticaUy. How could you provide proof that the hedging is more accurate? Once again we could run back-testing on market data. If the variance of the profit and loss to a trading book is less under your new model than the current model, the hedging is more accurate and hence you have a better model.
   In addition, you will have to discuss the advantages of the model over the old. These could include

• speed;
• realism;
• ease of calibration;
• ability to easily specify new products.

Here are some possible related questions:

• Discuss some of the main reasons why hedge funds have found them­ selves in trouble using statistical arbitrage models.
• If you had a perfect model for a stock process, what features would the
model most like]y have?

?

2.3. SOLUTIONS	65
2.3.6. Trees and Monte Carlo.
   Solution to Question 2.50. This is a standard trick question to see if you make the mistake of using p in the answer. This precise example is discussed in detail in [6] so if you claim to have read it, make you sure that you can do this question.
   The easiest solution is simply to use risk-neutral evaluation. The risk-neutral probability of an up-move is 0.5 by symmetry. The value of a call option is 10 in the up-state and O in the down-state so the answer is
10 X 0.5 = 5,
since there are no interest rates.
   One could also use a hedging argument We could hold 8 stocks and minus one option. We choose 8 so that the portfolio has the same value in both states. The two values are
1108 - 10 and 908.
These are equal if and only if 8 = 0.5. The value is then 45. By no arbitrage, this portfolio is also worth 45 today. So
50 - Option = 45,
and the option price is 5.
   A third method of doing this problem is to use the stock and bond to replicate the option payoff, which obviously leads to the same value.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Price using the stock and bond to replicate the option payoff.
• What about a put struck at 100? (There's a very easy solution!)
• How will introducing interest rates affect the price?
• Without computations, how will the price with the branches at 80 and 120 compare?
?

   Solution to Question 2.51. A simple answer is that it could be worth anything between those values. However, given it is a short time horizon we can proceed

66	2. OPTION PRICING

as if these probabilities are both real world and risk-neutral. For the given probabilities to be risk neutral we need (neglecting interest rates as the time scale is very small)
IE(Sr) = So.
We then have that the stock is currently trading at
So = 100 x 0.6	50 x 0.4 = 80.
An at-the-money European call option will have a strike of 80. There is a 60% chance in the risk-neutral measure that it will pay off 20 and a 40% chance it
will pay off nothing. Its value must therefore be 20 x 0.6 = 12.
   If the actual	tock price is 75, then we can compute the risk-neutral proba­ bilities and these will be different from the real-world ones.
Here are  ome po sible related que tions:

• Explain why an at-the-money put option expiring at the end of the day is worth 12 also. Do not u e probabilities in the explanation.
• What if tomorrow'  tock prices could go up from today's prices by 20 with probability 0.6 and down 10 with probability 0.4? Price a call option expiring tomorrow.
?

Solution to Question 2.52. Thi example i ana1yzed in detail in [6], Chapter
3. The e ential point is that the model is incomplete so we can only bound the option price.
   The easiest approach is ri k-neutral evaluation. As usual, the real-world probabilities are irrelevant provided they are non-zero. The condition that the expected stock price is today's price is that the probability of an up-move and a down-move are the same. Our three probabilities are therefore
p,1-  2p,p.
The e must all be positive for the ri k-neutral measure to be equivalent to the real-world measure. This means that plies in the open range (0, 0.5). The price of the call option can therefore vary between zero and 5.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	67

   We also look at how to do this via hedging as the inte,rviewer may insist on that approach. The price wil1 be less than that of any super-replicating portfolio, and more than that of any sub-replicating portfolio.
   Clearly zero sub-replicates so the price is positive. The portfolios in this problem are just multiples of the stock and the bond; their value is a straight line as a function of the stock price. The three points we have to consider
(90, 0), (100, 0), and (110,10).
We can fit a straight Jine through any two. For the first two, we just have the zero line and get a lower bound of zero.
   For the first and last, we get 0.5 stocks and -45 bonds. This will dominate the price at 100 since it has value 5 rather than zero th.ere. The value of this super-replicating portfolio Is 5 so the price is less than 5.
   For the final two points, the line has slope 1, so we hold 1 stock and -100 bonds. This has value zero today so we get the same lower bound of zero. In fact, we could consider any portfoHo with a holding of 8 stocks and -1008
bonds, for O < 8 < 1 and get a lower bound of zero, which passes through the
middle point.
   Making a formal argument that there are no sub-replicating portfoHos of higher value is a littJe tedious, but it is clear geometricaUy.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Why do the risk-neutral and replication arguments g.ive the same answer?
• How would you make a price when the market is incomplete?
• Suppose the price of the call option struck at 100 is 2.5, what is the
price of a caJI option struck at 95?
?
   Solution to Question 2.53. The crucial point here is that when using a model as a computational device, we are not doing no arbitrage arguments. Instead, we are approximating a given risk-neutral measure. In this case,. th.e risk-neutral measure we are approximating is geometric Brownian motion with a growth rate of r.

68	2. OPTION PRICING

We can think of four operations:

• Passing to the risk-neutral measure.
• Discretization with a trinomial tree.
• Pricing.
• Passing to the limit.

The crucial point here is that the first two of these do not commute.
   One reason why a trinomial tree is a useful computational device is that it does not natural1y oscillate in the same was as a binomia1 tree. That is if the number of time steps in the tree changes by one, the price will not change as much as in a binomial tree. Trinomial trees also have much flexibility in terms of node p1acement since one can play with 3 node locations and two probabilities, whereas with a binomial tree there are two node locations and one probability. We have to match two quantities (at least asymptotically): mean and variance. This means that one can adapt node placement to the product, so, for example, nodes lie on barri.ers.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What properties must a trinomial tree have to converge to the Black­ Scholes price?
• Is it nece.ssary for the discretized tree to be risk-neutral?
• Are trinomial trees better than binomial ones?

?

   Solution to Question 2.54. If two assets have the same pri.ce and volatility then their option prices wilJ be the same. This will be true whether we are looking at a binomial tree or we are in the Black-Scholes model. When pricing an option using a binomial tree we are using risk-neutral probabilities and these do not depend on research that says A will perfonn better than B..
   This question is analogous to why the drift of the stock price does not affect the option price. See Questions 2.1 and 2.27.

2.3. SOLUTIONS	69

Here is a related question:

• In what sort of market could the prices of the two options differ? Why?
?

   Solution to Question 2.55. The great virtue of a binomial tree is that it is easy to do early exercise. Its rate of conve:rgence for continuous payoffs including American options is 1/n, where n is the number of steps. Since the number of computations increases as n2 this means that the rate of convergence is t-1/2 where tis computational time.. (Your interviewer may not know this.....) For higher
dimensional trees, convergence will be slower. Path.-dependence is not natural in trees but can be dealt with by using an auxiliary variable which increases the dimension by 1.
The great virtues of Monte Carlo are:
• Convergence is order t-1/2 in al] dimensions.
• Path-dependence is easy.

The. great downside is that early exercise is hard (see Question 2.57). The other downside is slowness of convergence in low dimensions, although it is no slower than a binomial tree, there are other faster Jattice methods in low dimensions.
   The convergence speed and eady exercise can be coped with, but it requires much work. As a ru]e of thumb, use binomial trees for low-dimensional prob­ Jems involving early exercise, and Monte Carlo for high-dimensional prob]ems involving path-dependence.
Here are some possible related questions:

• How would you price a path-dependent option with ear1y exercise features on a tree? For example, an American Asian option.
• How would you price a path-dependent option with eM1y exercise features by Monte Carlo? For example,, an American Asian option.
• What's the fastest way to do one-dimensional numerical integrations?
• How would you speed up a Monte Carlo simulation?

?

70	2. OPTION PRIClNG

   Solution to Question 2.56. The problem does not state the strike so we will assume that it is 100. It aJso does not state the interest rate, so we will assume it is zero.
   The risk-neutral probability of an up-move is 1/3 by inspection, or by solving the equation


The value is therefore

150p + 75(1 - p) = 100.
50	2	2
-	+-XO= 16-.
3	3	3

To get the Delta, we need to find the hedge that eliminates all risk.
This will be the amount of stock1 8 such that
1506 - 50 = 758.

We solve this to get
Here ace some possible related questions:
• What if there is a 10% interest rate across the time period?
• Why is the probability of the up move not stated?
• What use is a binomial tree?
• Suppose we define	to mean sensitivity to the initial spot, and the move sizes are constant as we change spot, what is .6. then?

D

   Solution to Question 2.57. As we saw in Question 2.55 it is difficult to use Monte Carlo for products with early exercise features, such as American options. The Longstaff-Schwartz method is one way to handJe early exercise using Monte Carlo.
   When pricing an early exercisable product, we need to know at a given time whether it will be worth more by exercising now or by holding onto it. The value of holding onto the option1 known as the continuation value, is what the Longstaff-Schwartz method estimates via regression. The Longstaff-Schwartz method is commonly used for such products as Bermudan swaptions.

2.3. SOLUTIO. S	71
   Before we jump into the algorithm, a few details are necessary. A regression needs to be carried out against some basis functions, for examp]e we might regress y against some explanatory variables x and x2• Choosing good basis functmons that will estimate the continuation value accurately is very much an art.
The Longstaff-Schwartz algorithm is:

(1) Run a certain number of Monte Carlo paths (e.g. 1000) and store the exercise va]ue divided by the numeraire at each possible exercise date for each path. We also need to store the value of the basis functions at the same points.
(2) With all this data we now look at the second last exe.rcise date. We perform a regression (usually least-squares) of the value at the, last exercise date against the, basis functions. This gives coefficients, ai, for the basis functions.
(3) Using these coefficients we can calculate the continuation va1ue at the second last exercise time for each path, using for examp]e y = et1x + a2x2.
(4) We now replace the deflated exercise value stored initially with the continuation value, if the continuation value is greater.
(5) Continue back through the exercise dates until reaching time 0. The (biased) value of the product will be the average of the time zero values multiplied by the initial numeraire value.

Here are some possible related que-stions:

• Why will the above algorithm produce a biased price? Will the bias be large? Suggest a way to remove the bias.
• What other methods do you know of to fit early exercise into Monte Carlo.
• What are some useful basis functions when pricing a Bermudan swap­ tion?

?

72	2. om	PR
2.3.7. Incomplete mark	.
Soluti n t	uestion 2. 8. Implied volatility i	imply th	v lalility implied


1 u	• 2. •	V Jatili	mil .

fr m the market price of an opti , wing ome m del. It i usually calculated by taking th  option'  price and finding the volatility in    Blac   ·holes ormuJa th l retll   th  am · price. F r  ampl ,  n id r an a -lb  moo y Eu(i p  n all o tion with 1 y  r to  piry,  p t valt1  100 a d a ri k fr  rat of 5 ·. If the market price of thi  opti n is $ . 0, then the implied v latility will b  I
    If one  alculates th  i  pli d vola iHty of opli n with th  ame  piry but different trik pri	pl  th vol iliti  lh r i   n a mil or hapc.   olatiJUy smile wilJ look  m thing like Figure 2.8.
   There ar many possi 1 e plan ti   fi r why  me mar  ts e hi it volatility srnil s.  n  pos ible explanation i that the mar  t is m re likely to mov  up  r d wn ;y  1   am unt than i a sumed within the Bl  k _,_ bole model. Hen
the  mil  reft  t  u  mar  t'  vi w of th  imper  lions in th  Bla k   h 1 s
model


A volatility skew i
ompar	to the more  ymm tri
like Figure	. .

mil . b t it i	dow ward	lopin
mil .	volatUity  k w c uld look	m m· g

	 73

01

OH
016

0.15
0014
>
013
1i
- 0 2

011

01

0

SI


F1G  R	Volatility	k w.




[6].


Her	ar	om	po	ibl	related qu	ti n :
• Whi b	hape will the implied v latility take fur equity market5, . kew or mil ? h pJain.

• Wh n	id 1h	v latili y	miJ	fir t p
• If th	ma k t w	pricin
p rsL tent featur , d	cri

r in the equity mar	wb ?
r	tly and th	smil	wa  not
e opJX)rtunity.





     olution to Question 2.59. There are many different option pricing m del that captur	som	of th	eature	of market ·miles. Th			large number of models mak	it		diffi ult to		er th m all in d tail, o w	fo u our an w r		n four p pular mod			: jump dilfu i n,		och	tic v latility,		rianc	amm	nd locaJ
olatility.	r detail,	f the fir t th	m	1	refi r the reade	to l6]
hapter 2	of [201 for lo al volatility.
   Jump diffusion m del, hav	the foreign exchang	rat	m	ing as e m tri Brownian motion with an added random jump comp nent. The jump comp nent

74	2. OPTION PRICING


FmuRE 2.10. Jump diffusion implied volatility smiJe.

is usually a Poisson process.. If St is the exchange rate,. we could have
dSt = µdt + ud'Wt + (J - l)dNt,
St
where J is a random jump size (J could be log-normally distributed, for example) an.d Nt is the Poisson process. Jump diffusion models produce what is known as a floating smile. This means that the smile moves when spot moves, so that the bottom of the smile will remain at-the-money. As floating smiles are a feature of foreign exchange markets this is an advantage of jump diffusion models.
   One disadvantage of jump-diffusion model is that the smiles produced flatten with maturity quickly; this is not observed in most markets. See Figure 2.10 for an example in which the smile has largely disappeared after after 2 years.
   Stochastic volatility models take both the foreign exchange rate and volatility process to be stochastic. There are many popular forms for the volatility process; the Heston model, for example, uses
dSt _	!ti    (1)
St	-	µdt	y	1/4d	'
d1/2 = fi,((} - 1/2)dt + av J1/4dwP))

2.3. SOLUTIONS	75


FrouRE 2.11. Heston model implied volatility smile.

where 0 is the long term average volatility, K is the rate at which the process
reverts to Us mean, ov is the volatility of voJatHity, and w?) and U'i(2) are Brownian motions with correlation p.
   Stochastic volatility models also produce a floating smile and their smile shape can be easily changed by tweaking the parameters. For example, skew can be introduced by having p non-Zieto, the flattening out of the smile can be adjusted by the mean reversion parameter K, etc. Figure 2.11 shows an example smile from the Heston model.
   Having the flexibility of changing the smile shape has its disadvantages in that all these parameters need to be fitted in a stable and consistent way with the market,. which is not a straightforward task.
   Variance Gamma models take the foreign exchange rate and time as a random process. The idea is that foreign e change rates move when market information arrives and this information arrival is itself a random process. For example, if a large amount of information is arriving then we can expect high volatility, however on a day with minimal information arrival we can expect low

76	2. OPTION PRICING


FIGURE 2.12. Variance Gamma implied volatility smile.

volatility. To define a Variance Gamma model we let b( t;0, a) be a Brownian motion, i.e.



and we let

dbt = 0dt + adWt


X(t; a,v,0) = b(Tt; 0, a),


where Tt is the time t value of a Gamma process with variance rate v.
Variance Gamma smiles are similar to jump diffusion smiles, compare Figure
2.10 and 2.12. The smiles tend to flatten out over time as the model becomes more similar to a pure diffusive model.
   Local volatility models derive the volatility surface from quoted market prices and then use this surface to price more exotic instruments. It turns out that under risk-neutrality there is a unique diffusion process consistent with market prices. The unique volatility function a(St,t) is known as the local volatility function.
   Once this local volatility surface has been found, exotic instruments can be priced consistently with market prices. The problem however, is that the volatility

2.3. SOLUTIONS	77

surface is the market's current view of volati1ity and this will change in the future) meaning the exotic options will no longer be consistent with market prices.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Which of the above models are incomplete and why?
• Discuss the features of equity and interest rate smi1es as compared to foreign exchange smiles.
• Given the four models above, you have to use one. What criteria would you use to pick a model?
?

   Solution to Question 2.60. A stochastic volatility model takes volatility to be driven by a random process. It is then possible that the volatility will become large causing large movements in the underlying asset price. These large moves give the distribution of the underlying asset fatter tails than in the Black-Scholes model. This means that options away from the money wil1 be priced more expensively than in Black-Scholes leading to a volatility smile.
   Another way to think about why the smile occurs is by looking at the second derivative of the option price with respect to the volatility. In the Black­ Scholes world our Vega sensitivity (how good our volatility hedge is) will be ze.ro. However, a stochastic volatility model will not necessarily have a non-zero derivative of Vega, therefore there is Vega convexity which is related to the volatility smile.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Explain why a jump-diffusion mode] and a Variance Gamma model produce smiles.
• Explain why a jump-diffusion model's smile flattens out with time, whereas a stochastic volatility model's smile may not.
?



CHAPTER 3

Probability

3.1. Introduction

   This chapter focuse.s on questions from probability and stochastic processes. There is an inevitable over1ap with Chapter 2, since random proce-sse-s are at the. core of modem pricing theory.
   Problems range from the elementary, e.g.1 "what is the expectation of a single roll of a fair die?'\ to the rather hard. The interviewer is looking for two things: the ability to think probabi1istically, and evidence of having studied stochastic processes. We have divided the questions between general problems many of which involve coin tosses, and questions about stochastic processes.
   For the more cbaJ]enging questions, we include references to allow the reader to study all the details. Before attempting quant job interviews, a study of probability theory is a must; here are several excellent books on the topic:
   "Elementary Probabi1ity Theory" by Kaj Lai Chung is a great place to start. The text is primarily aimed at people doing a first undergraduate course in probability. The book also includes a chapter on financial mathematics.
   "Probability and Random Processes" by Geoffrey Grimmett and David Sti:rzaker is slightly more challenging than Chung. The book is well presented and worth reading.
   Another exceUent book covering basic probability (and continuing to more advance.d topics) is Wi11iam Feller's two volume "An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications". Volume I covers discrete distributions and events, Volume II moves onto the continuous treatment. The exp1anations are p:re-se.nted in a clear and concise manner.


79

80	3. PROBABILITY

   If you have some probability knowledge, "Probability with Martingales" by David Williams is a great pface to start for discrete time martingales. The style is clear and informative while presenting solid mathematical ideas.
   Following on from this, try the two volume set 'Tiiffusions, Markov Processes and Martingales" by Chris Rogers and David Williams. Much of the material from Williams is repeated quickly in this book, before they proceed to discuss the basics of Brownian motion and continuous time martingales. The second volume di cusses stochastic calculus.
   "Introduction to Stochastic Integration" by Kai Lai Chung and Ruth WiUiams is a very readable account of stochastic integration theory. It assumes knowledge of continuous time martingales, however, so you must learn that elsewhere first.
   If you want books with a more mathematical finance approach, "The Concepts and Practice of Mathematical Finance" by the first author of this book, Mark Joshi, is an excellent place to start.
   ..Stochastic Calculus for Finance" Volumes I and 11 by Steven Shreve are also a great introduction. Relative to "The Concepts and Practice of Mathematical Finance", this book tends to focus on the mathematics rather than the finance.


3.2. Questions

3.2.1. General.

    QuESTtON 3.1. Consider the following game. The player tosses a die once only. The payoff is 1 dollar for each dot on the upturned face. Assuming a fajr die, at what level should you set the ticket price of this game?

     QuESTlON 3..2. Suppose we play a game. I roll a die up to three times. Each time I roll, you can either take the number showing as dollars, or roll a.gain. What is your expected winnings?
     QUESTION 3.3. Let's play a game. There are four sealed boxes. There is 100 pounds in one box and the others are empty. A player can pay X to open a box and take the contents as many times as they like. Assuming this is a fair game, what is the value of X?

3.2. QUESTIONS	SJ

    QUESTION 3.4. We play a game: I pick a number n from 1 to 100. If you guess correctly, I pay you $n and zero otherwise. How much would you pay to play this game?
    QuESTJON 3.5. Suppose you have a fair c-0in. You start with a dollar, and if you toss a H, your position doubles, if you toss a T, your position halves...What is the expected value of the money you have if you toss the coin infinitely?
    QUESTION 3.6. Suppose we toss a fair coin, and let N denote the number of tosses until we get a head (including the final toss). What is JE(N) and Var(N)?
    QUESTION 3..7. We play a game, with a fair coin. The game stops when either two heads (H) or tails (T) appear consecutively. What is the expected ti.me unti] the game stops?
    QUESTION 3.8. For a fair coin, what is the expected number of tosses to get three heads in a row?
    QuEST10N 3.9. You toss a biased coin. What is the expected length of time until a head is tossed? For two consecutive heads?
    QuEST[ON 3.10. I have a bag containing nine ordinary coins and one double­ headed one. I remove a coin and flip it three times. It comes up heads each time. What is the probability that it is the. double-header?
    QUESTION 3.11. I take an ordinary-looking coin out of my pocket and flip it three times. Each time it is a head. What do you think is the probability that the next flip is also a head? What if I had flipped the coin 100 times and each flip was a head?
    QuESTION 3.12. You throw a fair coin one rnilHon time.. What is the expected number of strings of 6 heads foJlowed by 6 tails?
    QUESTION 3.13. Suppose you are throwing a dart at a circular board. What is your expected distance from the center? Make any necessary assumptions. Suppose you win a dolJar if you hit 10 times in a row inside a radius of R/2, where R is the radius of the board. You have to pay 10c for every try. If you try 100 times, how much money would you have lost/made in expectation? Does your answer change if you are a profession and your probability of hitting ins1de R/2 is double of hitting outside R/2?

82	3. PROBABILJTY

   QUESTION 3.14. A woman has two babies. One of them is a girl, what is the probability that the other is a boy?
   QuEsnoN 3.15. A family has two children of whom you know at ]east one is a girl. What is the probability that both are girls? What if you know that the eldest is a girl? What if you know that they have a girl called Clarissa?
   QuEsTJON 3.16. What is the probabi1ity that the fourth business day of the month is Thursday?
   QUESTION 3.17. You are playing Russian Roulette. There are precisely two bul1ets in neighbouring chambers of the six shooter revolver. Th.e barrel is spun. The trigger is pulled and the gun does not fire. You are next, do you spin again or pull the trigger?
    QuESTION 3.18.. Consider a deck of 52 cards, ordered such that A.> K > Q > ... > 2. I pick one first, then you pick one, what is the probability that my card is larger than yours?
   QuESTJ0N 3.19, Suppose 2n teams participate in a championship. Once a team loses, it is out. Suppose a1so that you know the ranking of teams in advance and you know that a team with a higher rank wil1 always win the game with a team of lower rank. In the beginning, all teams are randomly assigne-d to play with each other. What would be the probability that in the final, the best team will play the second best?
   QuESTION 3.20. A drawer contains 2 red socks and 2 black socks. If you pull out 2 socks at random, what's the probability that they match.
    QuESTJON 3.21. If I draw two cards from an ordinary deck with replacement, what is the probability that they are both aces? Without replacement?
    QuESTJON 3.22. Suppose we have an ant traveling on edges of a cube, going from one vertex to another. The ant neve,r stops and it takes him one minute to go along one edge. At every vertex, the ant randomly picks one of the three available edges and starts going along that edge. We pick a vertex of the cube and put the ant there. What is the expected number of minutes that it will take the ant to return to that same vertex?
   QUESTION 3.23. You have been captured and blindfolded by pirates, then placed somewhere on a five-meter-long wooden plank. Disorientated, each step

3.2. QUESTIONS	83

you take is a meter long but in a random dire.ction - either toward the sharks waiting at one end or eventual freedom at the other. If x (integer) is the distance in meters you start from the safe end, determine the probability of your survival as a function of x.
    QUESTION 3.24. Romeo and Juliet have agreed to meet for a date sometime between 9pm and 10pm. Each of them randomly picks a time within this interval and shows up and waits for the other for fifteen minutes. What is the probability that they will actually meet?
    QUESTION 3.25. A plane has one hundred seats and there are exactly one hundred people boarding. They line up at the gate in exactly the same order as the order of the seats on the plane, from 1 to 100. However. the first person is Grandma who doesn't see well, so instead of taking the first seat on the plane, she picks a random seat and sits down. Now, the rule is: when any other person enters the plane, he or she will try to sit at his own seat. H this is not possib]e, this person chooses one of the free seats randomly. Eventually, everyone boards the plane. What is the probability that the last person (number 100) will sit at his assigned seat number?
    QuEsnoN 3.26. Suppose three assets A, B, Care such that the correlation coefficient of A and B is 0.9 aod the correlation coefficient of B and C is 0.8. Is it possible for A and C to have correlation coefficient 0.1?
    QuESTION 3.27. Let x, y be uniformly distributed on [O,1) and separate the unit interval [O,1] into 3 pieces, what is the probability that the 3 pieces of the line can be constructed into a triangle?
    QussnoN 1.28. What is the distribution function of a uniform U( a, b) random variable?
    QuESTroN 3.29. Suppose xi	x2, ... , Xn. are independent identica11y dis-­ tributed from [0, 1] and uniform on the interval. What is the expected value of the maximum? What is the expected value of the difference between the maximum and the minimum?
QuESTJON 3.30. Give an example of a distribution with infinite variance.
    QUESTION 3.31. Suppose the random variable X has a probability density function fx(x). What density function does g(X) have?

84	3. PROB.ABILITY

    QuEsnoN 3.32. What is the distribution function and density function of the kth order statistic?
    QuFSTION 3.33. Let X and Y be two independent uniform random variables on the unjt interval [O, 1]. "What is the probability density function of X + Y?
QuESTlON 3..34.. What does the Centra] Limit theorem say?
QUESTION 3..35. Prove that a covariance matrix. is positive definite.
    QuESTION 3.36. Explain change of measure. Give an example when a change of measure is useful in Monte Carlo.
    QuESTlON 3.37. If Xis  N(µ,a) and,\> 0, calculate the values of 1E(X2) and IE(exp(,\X)).
QuESTJON 3.38. If M(x) is the cumulative Gaussian function and X  is
N(O, 1) then what is E[M(X)]?

3.2.2. Stochastic processes.
QuBSTroN 3.39. What is Brownfan motion?
    QuESTION 3.40. Suppose we are doing a random walk on the  interval [O, 1000], starting at 80. So, with probability 1/2 this number increases or decrnases by one at each step. We stop when one of the boundaries of the interval is reached. What is the probability that this boundary will be O?
QuBSTION 3.41. If St follows a log-normal Brownian motjon, what process
does the square of St follow?
     QUESTION 3.42. Suppose you have a call option on the square of a log-normal asset. What equation does the price satisfy?
    QuEsTmN 3.43. Assume the stock price process St follows the stochastic differential equation
dSt	a(µ - St)dt + Sta-dWt,
with a, er and µ > 0. What sort of qualitative behaviour does the stock price exhibit? What is the impact of the parameters a and µ? What effects do they have on the price of a call option on this stock?

3.3. SOLUTlONS	85

QUESTION 3.44. Given that dSt = µStdt+o-StdWt, give an SDE for log(St),
QuEsTioN 3.45. Show that the process
Xt = cosh(AWt) exp(->i.2t/2)

is a martingale.
QuESTtON 3.46. If Wt is a standard Brownian motion, is Wl a martingale?
    QUESTION 3.47. Apply Ito's formula to 2Wt, where Wt is a Brownian motion, is it a martingale?
    QuESTION 3.48. Given two independent Brownian motions Wt and Zt, what is the distribution of   What stochastic differential equation is satisfied by the ratio?
QUESTION 3.49. Solve the SOE of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.

QUESTION 3.50. Calculate IE(WsWt)  where Wt is standard Brownian motion.
   QUESTION 3.51. If we have a Brownian motiont Xti Xo = 0, X1 > 0; what is the probability of X 2 < 0?
    QUBSTlON 3.52. Let W be a Brownian bridge, that is a Brownian motion constrained such that Wo = 0 and Wt = x. What is the distribution of Wst for 0 < s < t?
QuESTION 3.53. We often write dt = (dWt)2. Wbat does this mean?
QUESTION 3.54. Why is Ito's lemma true?

3.3. Solutions

3.3.1. General.
   Solution to Question 3.1. This is a simple question asking us to calculate the expected number of dots on the upturned face of a fair die. Evaluating this in the standrud way gives

IE(number of dots)= 1 x

1 + 2 x

1 +···+ 6 x

1 = 3.5.
6

86	3. PROBABil,ITY

The ticket level is slightly more interesting, after all we want to make a profit. To avoid going broke we need to charge at lea t 3.5, however perhaps we can play on people's enjoyment of gambling and charge slightly more than this fair price.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Evaluate the expectation for an n-sided die, with n a positive integer.
• What is the expectation of the sum of two rolls?
• What is the probability of getting seven with two rolls?

?

   Solution to Question 3.2. This problem should be approached from the end. If instead I only offered you one roll of the dice, what are your expected winnings? Clearly the an wer here is

6	1
lE(l die) =	i	= 3.5.
i=l

Now if I offer you two dice, you can either take the result of the first roll, or proceed onto the second die. The optimal strategy is to take the first roll if it is better than your expected winnings from the second roll, or continue otherwise.
Thu  we take the first roll if it is 4 or greater, otherwise we continue, giving

lE(2 dice)= E(max{first roll, expected winnings from 1 die})
1	1	1	1
= 6 X 6	6 X 5	6 X 4	2 X 3.5 = 4.25.
Repeating the same idea for the third die gives

E(3 dice)= lE(max{first roll, expected winnings from 2 dice})
= -1 X 6 + - X 5 + - X 4.25 =	2

6	6	3

4-.
3


Note that this is essentially the problem of pricing an option on a multinomial tree, and this i	why the problem is very popular with interviewers.

3.3. SOLUTIONS

Here are some possible related questions:

• How many rolls would I need to offer you before you will only accept
a 6 on the first roll?
• What sort of option does this problem relate to?
• How does your an wer change if the payment is the square of the number showing?
• What effect will it have if I charge you $1 for each additional roll?
?

   Solution to Question 3.3. Since this is a fair game, we must have that by playing optimaHy the player has an expected cost equal to their expected winnings. What is the optimal strategy? Say we set a price Y to play the game.. The price is 'fair' in the sense that the player will not, on average, incur a loss by playing at least once. If they do not win on their first pick, then clearly it is optima] to continue playing.. If it was worth playing when the odds of picking the correct box were 1 / 4, then if you can play for the same price with the increased odds of 1/3 it is worthwhile,.
   So we have that the optimal strategy is to continue playing until you pick the correct box. This means every time we play this strategy, we will win the 100 pounds. Thus we need to find a price X such that the expected cost of playing until you win is 100. Note
lE{C.ost) = XIP(win on first attempt)+ 2XIP'(win on second attempt)
+ 3XIP(win on third attempt)+ 4XJP'(win on fourth attempt).


We are dealing with conditional probabiUties, that is the probability of winning on your second attempt is the probability of pickmng the correct box the second time
after not picking it the first time. Thus, for example IP(win on second attempt) =
3/4 x } . This gives the equation for X
100 = 2.5X,
and solving we see X = 40.

88	3. PROBABILITY

   A a quick 'sanity check', why must the price be at least 25 (think about it before you read on)? If the price was less than 25, playing just once would be a game favourable to the player. While this might seem trivial, such checks can be quite handy as a quick way to detect illy mistakes.
Here are some possible related questions:

• In tead of maintaining a constant price, if you choose to continue playing after two incorrect guesses the price changes to Z. What is the fair value of X and Z?
• Generalise the above problem to the case of n boxes.

?
   Solution to Question 3.4. When you are asked a question like this, they are asking for the expected value under an optimal strategy. They generally don't want you to get into a discussion of risk preference .
   Note that this is really a game theory question. Each player has to pick a strategy. In thi case, an optimal strategy will be one in which the expected winning is independent of the strategy the opponent picks.
   Clearly, it is better for the payer to choose a small number so that he has to pay le s. On the other hand, if he always goes for a small number then he is more likely to have to pay out since the receiver will then also go for a mall number.
   The solution is to pick k with probability proportional to 1/ k. We therefore pick k with probability
-l ( I1:0-0 1)-l
k	. 1	j
J=


Our expected pay-out is then

100)-l
(J. =1 J

3.3. SOLUTIONS	89

whatever the other petson does. Note that the expected value decreases as the size of the set of numbers increases, as one would expect.
Here are some possible related questions;

• What if you receive the number squared?
• Why should the value decrease as the number of numbers increases?
?

Solution to Question 3.5. We work out what happens with one toss; then n
tosses,, and then let n tend to infinity.
Let X denote a toss then
1	11	5
lE(X)	22+ 22	4·
Provided the tosses are independent, the product of expectations is the expectation of the product. Let Xj be the effect of toss j. This means that
= TIE(Xj),
j=l

This clearly tends to infinity as n tends to infinity.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Suppose your position increases by a factor of x on a H instead of 2.
Classify the long term behaviour as a function of x.
• Suppose your position in.creases by a factor of x on a H and is multiplied by y with y < 1 otherwise. Classify the long term behaviour as a function of x and y.
?

   Solution to Question 3.6. The random variable N has a geometric distribution. Some care should be taken to avoid ambiguities arising from the inclusion of the

90	3. PROBABlLJTY

final toss - some definitions include it, giving a state space {1) 2) 3, ... }, while others do not, giving a state space {O, 1,2) ...}. Here we use the former, although this is not simply a question asking you to recite expectations and variances of common distributions so the definition is not important as long as we are clear. You may well a1ready know the answer but odds on if you're being asked this in an interview they want to see if you can derive it, so keep the answer to yourself and just use it to check what you arrive at from first prindples.
   Given our definJtion of N, it is clear that if N = k, then we had k - 1 consecutive tails followed by I head. From this we conclude



fork= 1, 2, ... Using the standard calculation for JE(X) we have


JE(X) = L00
k=I


0.5kk.


If you remember the formula for this series then you are done.. If you don't, or forget it under the pressure of the interview, here's a nice trick for quickly calculating it (which is easily extended to similar problems):

E{X) = 0.51 + 2 x 0.52 + 3 x 0.53 +···
::::} 0.51E(X) = 0.52 + 2 X 0.53 + 3 X 0.54 +...
0.5:IE(X) = 0.51 + 0.52 + 0.53 + ··· ,

the final line being the difference of the first two. This is also just the sum of
the probabilities lP'( N = k) and hence adds to 1, thus JE(X)  = 2.
Applying the same technique (twice) gives




and so Var(X) = 2.

E(X2=)

2- 	0.5= 6
0..52	. ,

3.3. SOLUTIONS	91
Here are some possible related questions:

• .I pay you $1 at the end of this year $2 at the end of next year and so on. The effective annual interest rate is i. Derive, from first principles, the value of this payment stream.
• Derive the expectation and variance of a random variable with a Poisson distribution.
• What is the mean and expectation if we redefine N to be the number of tails before we toss a bead?

?

   Solution to Question 3.7. We begin by deriving the distribution of the game
length. Let N denote the number of throws until the game stops, N E {2, 3, ... }. For the event { N = k} to occur, we can start with any throw. However after this the remaining sequence of k - 1 throws are,exactly determined. For example; for
the game to end in four throws if we begin with a H we need the sequence THH while if we begin with a T we need the sequence HTT. A determined sequence of k - 1 throws occurs with probability Q_5k-1, so
JP>(N = k) = 0.5k-l _
This gives the expectation as





Thus

00
lE(N) =	k0.5k-l = 2 x. 0.5 + 3 x. 0.52 +··· .
k=2


0.5E(N) = 2 x 0.52 + 3 x 0.53 +··· ,


and taking differences gives
0.5E(N) = 2 x 0.5 + 0.52 +0.53 +··· .
Observing that this is a geometric series (plus an additional tenn), we have
E(N) = 3.

92	3. PROBABD..JTY

Here are  ome possible related questions:

• What is the variance of N?
• How is the expectation changed if we alter the game o we need three consecutive occurrences of either heads or tail	to end the game?

?

   Solution to Question 3.8. There are many ways to do this. One particularly nice way using pricing ideas i via a gambling strategy. It i always good to answer questions in a quant job interview using methods that appear finance related.
   We gamble in such a way that we make money on heads but such that if we get a T on to  n, our po ition is -n.
   We therefore gamble one unit on the fir t toss and on each tos after a T. After one head, we gamble three. Thi guarantees that if we get a T next then we go to minus n. After two heads, we are therefore up four, and so we gamble seven to get us to -n again if the next toss is tails. Our gambling winnings is a martingale, since we are making finite trades in a martingale. (Any bounded trading strategy in a martingale is a martingale.)
   After three heads, our position is 11 - (n - 3) = 14 - n. The time taken to get three heads is a topping time with finite expectation, so if we stop at it, we still have a martingale (Optional Sampling theorem). Thus

1E(14 - n) = 0,

and we are done.
   We really need to show that the topping time has finite expectation. This is ea y. The probability that coins 3k, 3k  1, 3k  2 are all heads is 1/8. So the probability that we have not obtained three heads in a row after 3k draws is less than


3.3. SOLUTIONS	93

The expected time to achieve three heads is therefore less than
I)3k)(1/S)k
k
which is clearly finite.
The book by Williams, [19], is a good reference for this material. He,re are some possible related questions:
• What's the answer for n heads?
• Show that the expected time is always an integer.
• A monkey types letters from the alphabet plus the space bar with egua1 probabi1ity at the rate of one a second. How long would it take him to type the string "option pricing"?
• A monkey type letters from the alphabet plus the space bar with equa1 probabi1ity at the rate of one a second. How long would it take him to type the string '13lack-Scholes"? (trick question)
?

   Solution to Question 3.9. Let the probability of a head be p. The probability of a head on throw j but not on the ·first j - 1 throws is
p(l - p)f-1.

The expected time is therefore
00
p I:j(1 - p)j_-1
j=l
We need to compute this infinite sum. We know
1	00
-=	xJ.
1-X	L..,
j=O

Differentiating, we get


(1 -1



00
x)2- -	'"JX""' j-1.
J=l

Let x = l -p.	We get that the infinite sum is l/p2• The answer is therefore 1/p.

94	3. PROBABILITY

   That's the brute force solution. We can also solve this using martingales, which gives an easier generalisation to the two Heads case. The solution is also more financial which is always good when doing a quant job interview.
   Suppose we receive 1 - p dollars when we toss a head, and pay p dollars when we toss a tail. Our expected gain per toss is then zero. If Xk is our position after k tosses, then this is a martingale.
   The time of the first head is a stopping time. Its expectation is finite because the probability of not getting a head in the first k tosses is (1 -  p)k which goes
to zero rapidly. This means that x,.., stopped at the first head is a martingale, and
its expected value is Xo = 0, using the Optional Sampling theorem.
Our position if we terminate at k tosses is
(1- p) - (k - l)p.
The expected value of this is zero, so rearranging we get
E(k) = -1.
p

   Now consider the second part of this problem. We construct a strategy so that if we get a T on toss k then our position is -kp. The main difference is that we now have to handle the case of getting a head then a tail
    If we threw a tail on toss k - 2 but a head on toss k - 1 then our position before toss k is
(1-p)-(k-2)p.
If we bet y dollars on toss k then our position after a tail on toss k is
(1-	p) - (k - 2)p -  yp.
We choose y to make this equal to -kp ..The solution is
y= l+p
p

The value of our position after two successive heads is then


-(k	-  2)p + 1 -   p + (1-	p) l

+ P_
p

3.3.. SOLUTIONS	95

The expected value of this is again zero so we can solve for the expected value
of k and get


Here are some possible related questions:

• Suppose the coin is fair, what is the expected number of tosses to get four heads in a row?
• Suppose the coin is fair. I gain one on a head. I lose one on a tail. I quit when my position is +l. Whaf s the probability that the game terminates? What's my expected winnings when the game ends? Explain.
?
Solution to Question 3.10. We can do this using Bayes' theorem: if the events
Ai partition our sample space, 0, that is
Ai n Aj = (c), for i -1- j,
UAi = 0,

theu for any event B C fl,
IP(BIAi)IP(Ai)
E IP(BIA1)IP(Aj)
j=l

Here we take A1 to be the event that the doubfo-headed coin is drawn, and
A2 to be that any other is drawn. We have

The probability of three heads with a fair coin is clearly 1/8  so we get
1 X fa	8

lx10	10

x 1 - -17.

96	3. PROBABILITY

Here are some possible re1ated questions:

• What if there are two double-headed coins?
• How many tosses would you need to be 95% sure that the coin is double-headed?

?
   Solution to Question 3.1l. If the coin is fair then the number of heads in a row before you flip has no affect on the probability of another head so the answer is 1/2.
   If the interviewer flips 100 heads in a row, then 1t is unlikely that the coin is fair since the probability of this happening is 2-100. In fact, in that case the most likely cause is that the coin is double-headed.
To properly answer this question, we really need a prior distribution: what is
our view that the coin is fair before we receive any information? Given we are in
an interview and the interviewer may play tricks on us, let's say that we estimate that the coin is double-headed with p = 1 % probability before we recejve any
information.
   This is a Bayesian approach to the problem, and we can apply Bayes' theorem. In fact, we are back in the situation of Question 3.10, and we can proceed in the same fashion. The probability that the coin is double-headed after N heads and no tails is

p

After 100 throws this will be very close to 1 for any reasonable p.
    You might mention that this problem comes up 1n the play "Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead" by Tom Stoppard. If you do not know this play, it is very funny and there is a great film version. It is based on two minor characters from ''Hamlee

3.3. SOL TIO S	97
Here are some possible related questions:

• Do you think that people are Bayesians?
• At what N would you get suspicious? (e.g. when would you be 99% sure that the coin is fixed?)
• Suppose the coin in tead of always tossing heads, alternated in such a way to give the sequence HTHTHTHTHT ... what then?
?

   Solution to Question 3.12. This one look hard but is not. There are 1,000,000 - 11 possible slots for the equence to occur. In each one of these slots, the probability is



The an wer i  therefore


1,000,000 - 11
212

which is 244.14. (How would you do this quickly and approximately in your head?)
   Many readers are probably wondering why this simple multiplication was ju tified. The crucial point is the linearity of expectation; this does not require independence. Let Ij have value 1 if the sequence tarting at toss j is correct and zero otherwise. We want to evaluate

However, this is just equal to

since finite sums commute with expectation. Here are some possible related questions:
• What is the expected number of sequences of six tail , if we do not aJlow overlaps?
• What is the probability of getting at least one· equence of six heads followed by ix tails? (very hard!)
?

98	3.. PROBABILITY

    Solution to Question 3.13. We first assume that the p:robabUity of landing in a subset of the board is equal to its area divided by the area of the board. This means that we (almost) always hit the dartboard but beyond that all points are equaHy likely. The dart board has radius R so the probability of landing inside a circle of radius s is
The density of the radius is therefore the derivative of this with respect to s
which is
2s
R2·
The expected distance from the centre is then

R
2s	2 R3	2R
R2sds = 3R2 = 3·
0

The probability of landing in a circle of radius R/2 is 1/ 4, to do this ten times in a row has probability


This is roughly a mil1ionth. If we do this one hundred times, our expected winnings are



We would have pay

1


10000·

100 X 0.1 = 10


dollars to play so this would be a very bad deal.
   If we were better at darts and the winning probability was 2/3 per throw, then the. probability of getting ten in a row is
210	1024	1

310

59049

50·

After 100 attempts, we wou]d win about 2 dollars so we would expect to be down 8 dollars. It is still a bad deal.

3.3. SOLUTIONS	99
Here are some possible related questions:

• For the player hitting the board at random. if the game is modified to work with a different radius, what radius is the break-even point?
• What would a fair price for the original game be for the better
darts player?
• Formulate and solve the three-dimensional analogue of this game.

D

Solution to Que-stion 3.14. See extended problem below.	D

Solution to Question 3.15. These problems are trickier than they first appear.
The key is to identify the possible sample points and their probabilities.
Here we have two children. The possibilities are,, with eldest fi.rst,

BB w.p. 0.25,
BG w.p. 0.25,
GB w.p. 0.25,
GG w.p. 0.25.

The probability of the event that at least one is a girl is 0.75. The probability of both being girls is 0.25..
We compute


ll'(GGI at least one G)	ll'(	 ( GG)	G),
at east one

and get 1/3. Note that the answer is not 0.5.
If the eldest is a girl. then we divide by 0.5 instead of 0. 75 and get 0.5.
   The last part is simply to throw you and is no different from the event that at least one is a girl.

100	3.. PROBABILITY

Here are some possible related questions:


• A dictator decides that to increase the number of sons in his realm, a family that has had a girl is allowed no more children. Wou1d this work?
• Suppose there are three children, what's the probability all three are girls if one is?
• Suppose there are three children, what's the probability all three are girls if the middle child is a boy?
• Suppose there. are three children, what's the probabi1ity that two are girls if the middle child is a boy?

?

   Solution to Question 3.16. Note the crudal point that the question refers to business days. We will take business days to be Monday to Friday. However, in an interview one should mention that there are other non-business days such as bank holidays, Good Friday and Christmas. Note that Thanksgiving is always on a Thursday.
    Given this, the important thing is that the fourth business day will be a Thursday if the first day of the month is a Saturday, Sunday or a Monday. The probability is therefore 3n.
Here are some possible related questions:


• An event happens on busine-ss day k of the month. We want to minimise the number of times it happens on a Monday. w·hat k do we choose.? (We prefor smaller kif equal probability.)
• What is the probability that the thJrd of January 2011 is a business day?
• What day of the week should we pick something to happen to minimise it happening on the fourth business day of the. month?

?

3.3. SOLUTIONS

   Solution to Question 3.17. Assuming you haven't left the interview by now, here1s the idea. If you spin again, you clearly have a 1/3 probabiHty of being shot, as two out of six chambers are loaded.
   What is the probability if you don't spin again? The initial spin must have taken you to one of the four empty chambers. Only one of these precedes a loaded chamber. Thus if you don't spin again, you have a 1/ 4 chance of being shot.
If you're still sitting there, don't spin again. Here are some possible related que-stions:
• How do the odds change if we ]oad three contiguous chambers?
• What if there are three rounds in alternating chambers?

D


   Solution to Question 3..18. As usual, we can make this problem a Jot simpler by using symmetry. We first divide into the, two cases: they have the same rank or different ranks. The probability the second card has the same rank is 3/51. So the probability of different ranks is 48/51.
If they are of different ranks then the probability is 1/2 by symmetry.
So the answer is
148	24
2 51	51
Here are some possible related questions:

• What is the probability that the second card has the same suit?
• Suppose one suit is a trump suit. What is the probability that the second card would heat the first card in a trick? (i.e. it is a trump and the first card is not, or it is higher than the first card and in the same suit.)

D

    Solution to Question 3.19.. The first po.int to observe here is that the probability is not one: simply by bad luck, the second best team could play the best in the first round, and be knocked out

102	3. PROBABILITY

   We can think of a tree with the winner at the top. It has two branches below it corresponding to each of the semi-finals. Each semi-final has two branches corresponding to quarter finals. The best two teams will meet before the final if and only if they are below the same semi-final.
    Since the winning teams takes up one of the places in its half, the probability is 2#_1 if there are 2N teams.
Here are some possible related questions:

• There are M teams in a knock-out tournament. How many matches must be played to determine who wins?
• There are M teams in a knock-out tournament How many rounds must be played to determined who wins? (A round means any number of simultaneous matche-s with a team in a maximum of one match.)

?
   Solution to Question 3.20. After we, have pulled out one sock, there are three socks left. Only one of these matches the original sock so the probability is 1/3.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What if there were n different colours and you pull out two?
• What if there were n different colours and you pull out three?
• If there are 20 red socks and 20 black socks in a drawer, how many would you have to pu11 out to be sure of having a matching pair? (the answer is not 21.)

?

   Solution to Question 3.21. "WJth replacement'' means that I put the card back and reshuffle the deck before drawing the second time. This means that both draws are the same (that is they have the same probability distribution) and are independent of each other.

3.3. SOLUTIONS	103
   There are 13 ranks of card and 4 of each card. The probability of getting an ace on a single draw is therefore

and of two with replacement is

1/13,
1/169.

   Without replacement, we need the probability that the second is an ace given that the first one is.. There are 3 aces and 51 cards left so the probability is
3	1
51	17
The probability of two aces is therefore
1	1	1
13 X	17 = 221.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What's the probability I am dealt two aces at Pontoon?
• What's the probability of getting 3 aces with and without replacement?
• What's the probabiJity of getting an ace and a king without replacement?
?

   Solution to Question 3.22. Onoe we place the ant on a vertex, we will refer to this vertex as vertex 0, being zero distance from the starting position. Note that due to the symmetry of the cube, the expected number of minutes for the ant to return is a function of only the distanoe from this original position, which of the three vertices of distance one (for examp]e) the ant is on is irrelevant.
Let /(n) denote the ex.pected number of minutes for the ant to return from a vertex n units from the starting position, n = 0, 1, 2, 3. We want to find the value of /(0).
When we place the ant, it will travel to another vertex (taking one minute)1
and then be a distance of one from the origin. Thus
/(0) = 1 + /(1).

104	3. PROBABILITY

From a distance of one, it has a 1/3 chance of returning to the origin in one minute, or a 2/3 chance of taking one minute to travel to a vertex which is a di.stance of 2 from the origin. This gives



Arguing similarly gives

J(l) =31 + 2

+1).

/(2) = 2(/(1) + 1) + 1

+ 1)

3
J(3) = 1 + /(2).

3(f(3)

Solving this system of equations gives f(O) = 8.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Instead of constantly moving the ant gets tired and rests for one minute with probability 1/4. What is the new expected time?
• Repeat the question assuming the ant is walking on a regular tetrahedron.
?
   Solution to Question 3.23. Begin by making the obvious assumption that your steps have a uniform distribution on ±1, so you move one meter toward or away from safety with probability 0.5. We then let f(x) denote the probability of your survival from the starting position x, that is
f (x) = 1P'( You finish at the safe end I you start x meters from the safe end). There are (at least) two ways to approach this sort of question: recursion and a
martingale approach. We focus on the recursive approach and leave the martingale as an extension.
   As a recursive exercise, the reasoning goes as follows. If we start at x = 1, we head to safety with probability 0.5 or to a position two meters from safety with probability 0.5. From the second outcome, we survive with probability /(2)
- the proce-ss is Markov so it is just as if we had started from this position. We thus have
f (1) = 0.5f (0) + 0.5/(2) = 0.5+ 0.5/(2),
since clearly we have J(O) = 1 and f (5) = 0.

3.3. SOLUTIONS	10.S

Arguing in the same manner gives the system of equations
f (2) = 0.5/(1) + 0.5/(3),
/(3) = 0.5/(2) + 0.5/(4),
/(4) = 0.5J(3) + 0.5/(5) = 0.5J(3).
So1ving this system of equations (by hand, it is easiest to start with the final equation and. substitute backwards) we obtain the solution

f(l) =

4 ,	f(4) = i-

As a quick sanity check the probability of surviving from x = 1 should be the same as the probability of be,ing eaten from x = 4 due to symmetry,. which it is.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Solve the question using a martingale approach.
• Extend to an n meter long plank using both approaches.
• When would you prefer a shorter plank and when would you prefer a longer one?
?

Solution to Question 3.24. Clearly. one can do this by integration. Here's
a simpler solution .. The first thing to do is to phrase the problem in terms of a two-dimensional event. We pick two independent uniforms x, y from [O, 1] and the question is what is the probability Ix - YI < 0.25? In other words., what is
the probability that a pair {x, y) picked from the uniform distribution on the square



lies in the set

[0,1] X [0,1]

E = {(x,y) I Ix -yl< 0.25}.

We need to identify the geometry of E. This set will be a strip inside [0 1]x [Oi1],
with sides y = x +0..25 and y::::.x -0.25. Clear1y the comp1ement of this set is
two congruent right-angled triangles. The two short sides of these are of length
0.75. Th.e two triangles together th.erefore give a square of side 3/4. Its area is

106	3. PROBABD...ITY

therefore 9/16. And the answer is
9	7
l -	16 = 16·
Note the use of symmetry and 2-dimensional geometry in this probability problem.
Here are some po  ible related questions:

• Romeo and Juliet both wait x minutes. What is the probability?
• Romeo is twice as keen as Juliet and so waits 2x minutes. What is the probability?
?

   Solution to Question 3.25. There are a number of ways to do this. Most of these are tricky and complicated algebraically. However, if we condition on the right event it become easy.
   Every per on who doe not it in their own seat can do three things. Sit in seat 1, it in eat 100 or force someone else to sit in the wrong seat.
   If they sit in eat 1, then every subsequent person sits in the correct seat, and therefore so does the last passenger.
If they sit in seat 100, then the last passenger sits in the wrong seat.
   If they sit in any other seat, we are back in the same situation with fewer passengers and seats.
   Consider the last passenger who has a choice. Thi is a passenger below 100 who has been di placed. Since he is the last one displaced he must either sit in seat 100 or seat 1.
   The answer is therefore 1 /2, since the probability of sitting in either of these two seats is equal.
Here are some possible related que tions:
• What happens with N seats?
• An officious steward tries to make displaced passengers sit in seat 1. He ucceeds with probability 0.9. What's the probability of pa senger 100 being in the right seat?

3.3. SOLUTIONS	107
• What if grandpa comes as well? The first two passengers sit in two independent	eats at random.
?

Solution to Question 3.26. The question is equivalent to asking is the matrix
1	0.9	0.1 )

M = (

0.9	1	0.8
0.1	0.8	1

positive definite (see Question 3.35). This can be done by the methods outlined in Question 6.9. We choose the last method mentioned. Clearly the upper-left 1-by-1 corner of M has po itive determinant. The upper-left 2-by-2 corner of M has determinant 0.19, also positive. Finally, M has determinant -0.316, which is negative and hence the matrix i	not positive definite.
Thus it is not a covariance matrix, and hence it is not possible for A and C
to have correlation coefficient 0.1.
Here are ome po sible related questions:

• Given the correlation coefficients for the pairs (A, B) and (B, C), what are the allowable range of values for the correlation of (A, C)?
• What if the correlation of A and B is x and of B and C is y?

?

   Solution to Question 3.27. First, we need to transform the condition into omething less opaque. The three pieces will form a triangle if the longest piece is maller in size than the sum of the other two. This will happen if and only if
the bigge t piece is of ize le s than a half. Unfortunately, we do not know at the start which piece will be longest. However, this happens if precisely one of
x and y is less than 1/2, and Ix- YI < 1/2, (If both were in the same half interval,
the longe t piece would contain the other half interval.)
   A u ual when drawing two points, it is best to think of of (x, y) as a point in the unit square. We work out the geometry of the valid set in order to compute its
area. The condition that precisely one is less than 1/2, means that if we divide into

108	3. PROBABil..lTY
four squares of size 1/2, we are in the top left or the bottom right. Our remaining constraint says that we are below the diagonal from bottom left to top right in the top left square, and above the same diagonal in the bottom right square.
   The set therefore consists of two half small squares, and is of area equal to one small square. The answer is therefore 1/4.
He,re are some possible related questions:

• What if the second point is chosen to break the longer segment left after the first point has been chosen?
• What's the probability that the triangle is right angled?
• Suppose we taken points with n > 3. What's the probability of forming
an n-gon?

?

   Solution to Question 3.28. This is a reasonably straightforward question, and there are two ways to approach it. Firstly, recall the density function of a U(a,b) random variable is given by

1
j(x)=b-a'

a<x < b,

and f (x) = 0 outside this interval. Then the distribution function, F (x) is given by

F(x) = [	f(y)dy
x-a
b-a'
for a < x < b, F( x) = 0 for x < a and F( x) = 1 for x > b.
   The alternative is just to recall the 'idea' behind the uniform distribution: probability is spread uniformly over the interval. Thus the probability a .random variable takes a value in a given interval is simply proportional to the length
of that interval, JP'(x < U(a,b) < y) = k(y -  x) for some constant k and
a< x < y < b. Since IF{a < U(a1 b) < b) = 1 we seek= b a and hence
x-a
F(x)=JP'(a<U(a,b)<x)= b-a·

3.3. SOLUTIONS	109
Here are some possible re.lated questions:

• What is the distribution function of an exp(,.\.) random variable?
• What is the distribution function of a standard Cauc.hy random variable?
• What is the probability density function of a N(O, 1) random variable?
?

Solution to Question 3.29.  We want the distribution of the maximum of n
independent uniform random variables.
    It is easy to find the cumulative distribution function of the maximum of n independent random variables: i.t is simpIDy the product of the individual ones. To see this observe

= TIJP>(xi < x),
i::ccl

where the second equality uses the independence of the random variables.
We now have a program to attack this problem:

• compute the cumulative probability of a uniform;
• take the nth power;
• differentiate to get the probability density function;
• multiply by x and integrate to get the expectation.

The density of a uniform, U, is 1 between zero and one, and O otherwise. Integrating, we get
lP'(U < x)	x,
for x E [O, 1). This means that the cumulative distribution function of maxx; is given by


IP(maxxj < x) =

0 for X < 0,
xn for x E (0, 1)1
1 for x > l.

110	3. PROBABILITY

Differentiating the probability density function, we get
nx n-1 ,
for x E (0,1] and zero elsewhere. Multiplying by x and integrating from zero to one, we obtain

IE(maxxj)  =

n
n+ 1,

and we have completed the first part. For the second pa	by symmetry the expectation of min Xj is
1
n+l
Since taking expectations is linear, we have
IE(maxxj - minxj) = -n-.-1
n 1
Here are some possible related questions:

• What is the expectation of lx1 -  x2I?
• What is the density of x1 + x2?
• What is the expectation of minxj + maxxj?
?

Solution to Question 3.30. The Cauchy distribution has density function
1	1
1r 1 + x2•
Clearly, the second moment does not exist as we would have to integrate
x2
1 + x2
which tends to one as x goes to plus or minus infinity.
   It is worth noting that the expectation of this distribution does not really exist either, as the integral of
X

1 + x2
is
1 log(l +x2),

3.3. SOLUTIONS	lll

which is divergent as x-+ oo. The integral from -R to R is zero for any R, however, so the integral exists in a principal-value sense and is zero. ote that if your interviewer is a physicist, he may not get all these subtleties and may even regard your awareness of them as a negative.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Give an example where the expectation exists properly but the variance does not exist.
• Do you know of, or can you construct, other densities with infinite variance?
• If E[IXlk] exists, does 1E[IXlm] exist for O < m < k? Prove it.
?
   Solution to Question 3.31. This question tests your basic understanding of the definition of a probability density function. Recall
d	d
fx(x)	dx Fx(x) = dx JP> (X < x),
denoting by Fx(x) the distribution function of X. Let Y = g(X). Then the question is to evaluate

fv(x) =

-d Fv(x) =

d
-d JP>(Y

< x),

X	X
wher fy (x) is the probability density function of Y and Fy (x) is its distribution function. Continuing, assuming g(x) has an differentiable inverse g-1(x),
Jv(x) = dx IP (Y < x)
= dx JP> (g(X) < x)

= :xIP(X<g-1(x))
= :x Fx	(g-1(x))

= Ix (g-1(x))

d
dxg-l(x).

112	3. PROBABD..ITY

Here are some possible reJated questions:

• What is the distribution function of Y = g( X)? (This should be obvious from the above working).
• Can you conclude E(Y) = g(JE(X))? Give a counte,r-example. What
approximation can we use instead?
• What is Jensen's inequality?

?
   Solution to Question 3.32. The kth order statistic is the kth smallest value in a sample of n from a random distribution. Let the random variables Xi, X2, ... , Xn be independent and identically dfatributed. Label the smallest value X(l)• the
next smallest Xc2) and so on up to X(n)· Then the value of the kth order statistic
is XU.:), for 1 < k < n.
   Let F(z) denote the distribution function of the X/s and f (z) the density function. Th.e question asks us first to determine the distribution of the kth order statistic, that is



To have Xo.:) < x we need to have at least k of the n Xi's less than or equal to x. Each of then independent trials has probability F(x) of being less than or equal to x, thus the number of trfals less than or equal to x has a Binomial distribution with n trials and probability F(x). That is

Ir( X (k) < x) = f'(at least k successes from a Bi{n1 .F( x)) distribution)
= LIP(j successes)
j=k


3.3. SOLUTIONS	113

To find the density function we take the derivative with respect to x:

d
dxIP(X(k) < x)
=1(t(;)(F(x))J(l - F(x))'H + F(x)n)
= -t. l ( )(j(F(x))j-l f(x)(l - F(x)t-J
J.= k	J
-(n - j)(F(x)/(1 - F(x)r-J-1/(x)) + nf(x)F(x)n-l
= nf (x)	( (=;	:)(F(x))i-1(1-  F(x))"-j



-(n  j

1) (F(x))i(l - F(x))"-J-I) + nf(x)F(x)"-1



= nf(x) (	(n
j=k-1	J


l) (F(x))J(l - F(x))n-j-l


-	(n j 	1)tF(x)j(l  -F(x))"-j-l)   +nf(x)F(x)"-1.


Written in this form, it is obvious that the majority of terms will cancel. This leaves



Here are some possible related questions:

• Simplify this if the Xi ts are exponentially distributed.
• Now consider the joint random variable (X(ki), X(k2))··what is its distribution function?

?

114	3. PRO.BABD..JTY

   Solution to Question 3.33. We'11 begin with the more general case of two independent random variables X and Y with densities f (x) and g(x) respectively. We start by considering the distribution function of X + Y, and condition on the value of Y:
JP>{X'+ Y < z) = j Il1'(X + Y < zlY	y)f(y)dy
= f P(X < z -  y)f(y)dy,
due to the independence of the two random variables. To find the density, take a
derivative with respect to z, giving the density as


h(z) =

f(z -y)g(y)dy.


This is called the convolution of the two densities.
In our case, we have


f(x) = g(x) = {1'
0,

0 < X < 1,
otherwise.


The next step is the most important when considering such convolutions. How do the above restrictions to intervals for f(x) and g(x) translate to restrictions on f (z - y) and g(y)? This is not very difficult, but requires attention to detail.
We have
z·-y)= {1, z-l<y<z,
0,	otherwise,
and g (y) is done in the obvious manner. This gives
min{z,l}
h(z) =	ldy.
max{z-1,0}
We must therefore break the integral into separate cases, a situation which is quite common in these problems..
For z < 0, we therefore clearly have h(.z) = 0. For O < z < 1,
h(z) = Lz ldy	=	z,


andforl<z<2

3.3. SOLUTIO S	115

h(z) =1
Finally, for z > 2, h(z) = 0.

ldy = 2 -  z.
1

Here are some possible related questions:

• Repeat the question if X and - Y have exponential distributions.
• Derive the density of the product of the random variables X and Y.
• Derive the density of the ratio of the random variables X and Y, X/Y.

?

Solution to Question 3.34. The following information, along with further
details. can be found in [3], Vfil.4.
    There are actually several forms of the Central Limit theorem, which formally is just a weak convergence result in probability. The interviewer is probably just interested .in the most general and well-known result which is what we focus on here.
   This form of the Central Limit theorem involves the average of a sum of independent identically distributed random variables with finite second moment. The theorem states that as the number of random variables increases, the aver­ age approaches a normal distribution with known parameters. The remarkable part of this result is that it is independent of the starting distribution of the random variables.
   More formally, let X 1, X 2, ... , Xn be a sequence of n independent and identically distributed random vari.ables with finite mean µ and variance a2. Let Sn denote the sum of the random variables, that is Sn= X1 + X2 + ···+ Xn.
Then the Central .Limit theorem states that the random variable


converges (in distribution) to the standard normal distribution.

116	3. PROBABll..lTY

    As mentioned, other less well-known forms exist. Lindebe,rg proved a Cen­ tral Limit theorem for independent random variables which are not identically distributed.
Here are some possible related questions;

• What 1s convergence in distribution? What other types of convergence are there in probabmty theory?
• Using characteristic functions, prove the Central Limit theorem for
sums of random variab]es with finite second moments.
• What is Lindeberg's condition?
?
   Solution to Question 3.35. We have to be slightly careful here: the result is actually not true as stated. Interviewers often ge.t .it wrong! In fact, covariance matrices are positive semi-definite not positive definite: the difference is that a covariance matrix1 C, can have a .zero e1genvalue. or equivalently, the.re can exist a vector x such that

The key to this problem is the fact that .if the random variables

have covariance matrix.C then jf we take a linear combination of them,
y	= a1X1+ a2X2 + ... + anXn,

it has valiance where


atca,

a= (a1, a2, ... ,an).

Since any random variable has non-negative variance, this is greater than or equa1 to zero and we are done.
   One should really prove that Y has the variance claimed. To see this, observe that it is enough to conside,r the case where JE(Xi) = 0, for a11 i and then write out the sums.

3.3.. SOWTIONS	117

For further discussion, see Ł3], pp.80	82.
Here are some possible related questions:

• How can you tell if a matrix is positive definite?
• Give an example of a matrix with positive entries that js not positive semi-definite.
• Show that we did not lose any generality by assuming JE(Xi) = 0.

?

   Solution to Question 3.36. Change of measure means just that: changing the measure. The measure in question might be simply a distribution (say, of returns), or a measure defining a stochastic proce-ss. Changing the measure places different emphasis on different parts of the distribution, by making them more or less likely under the new measure. This might mean emphasising paths of a Brownian motion that have an upwards trend,. or making excessive returns more likely. However there are two golden rules: the new measure must assign probabilities to the same subsets, and things that were impossible under the old measure must be impossible under the new measure.
   Mathematically a change of measure is can be constructed as follows. Assume we have a probability space (f!, F,JF") and a positive, random variable on this space with expectation l, X. We then define the set function <Q: :F   [O,1] by
Ql(A) = JE[lAXJ = l XdP,
for A E F. Cl.early Q is absolutely continuous with respect to JP', that is
P(A) = 0 => Q(A) = 0.
The random-variable X is called the Radon-Nikodym derivative and is often written dQ/dlF. According to the Radon-Nikodym theorem, for any measure on (0, F) which is absolutely continuous with respect to JID there exists such a (a.s. unique) derivative so that the new measure may be expressed in this manner.
   The measures IP and IQ are said to be equivalent if IP' and Qare absolutely continuous with respect to each other. If JP' and <Q are equivalent, then we also

118	3. PROBABD.	ITY

have the derivative dIP/ dQ, which is




    The biggest use of measure changes in derivatives pricing is Girsanov's theorem, which is used to change the drift of a Brownian motion. Let (Ft) be the filtration of (n,:F, IP'), and !Pt the restriction of 1F to :Ft, Suppose we have a positive martingale Xt, t E [O, T] with JE[Xr] = 1.·we then define a new probability measure "Jlt on :Ft,

where A E Ft and we use the subscript on IErt to denote the measure we are taking the expectation under. This process is then the Radon-Nikodym dedvative dQtf d!Pt. We now present the idea of Girsanov,s Theorem,. see [4] p.556 for the details:
( Girsanov theorem) Let "'I be an adapted process satisfying certain conditions
and define
X, =exp(- l h•(u)l2du +l ')'(u)dW(u)) .
.lf JEp(Xr] = 1. then Xt is a martin.gale and defines a .new measure Q where
:	 =X(T).

Under Q, the process

w,Q = W, - 1' 7(u)du

is a standard Brownian motion.
   Hence Girsanov's theorem has defined a new measure under which the Brownian motion with drift W  is a drift.less Brownian motion.
   As an appHcation of change of measure to Monte Carlo, we look at importance sampling, as discussed in Section 4.6 of [4]. Here our goa1 is to use change of measure to reduce the variance of a sample. The idea is that some of the paths generated have little impact on the final result (usually an expectation), so time spent generating the e paths is essentially wasted. Using importance sampling, we make paths which have more impact more likely.

3.3. SOLUTIONS	119

   Let's consider a simple example, which is redundant (the expectation can be calculated simply without using Monte Carlo methods) but serves to illustrate the point.
   Say the final value of a stock (in the appropriate risk-neutral measure, with zero interest rates) is uniformly distributed on the interval (0, 1), that is BT rv U(0, 1). Denote this measure by P. Consider a digital option on this stock which pays 1 if the stock at time Tis above a level a E (0, 1) and 0 otherwise. Let C denote the value of this option, so


   The standard method of Monte Carlo simulation would be to simulate n random variables with a U(0,1) distribution, count how many are greater than a and divide by n. If C is this Monte Carlo estimator, then


where the Uk are independent and identically distributed U(0,1) random vari­ ables.
   We can evaluate the variance of this estimator in the standard way (note that lE(]·{Ui.>a})m = JP(Uk > a) = (1 - a), m = 1, 2, ... ), and see that Var(C) = a(l - a)/n.
   Now consider changing the measure we use. The simulation under the current measure only gives a non-zero result if we finish in the interval (a.,1), so let's change the measure to place more emphasis on the important part of the distribution, where the option has value. Do this by defining the measure with density

f(· x) = { '1-a
1-a>

0 < X < a,
a< X < 1,

for 0 < a < 1. This puts probability 1 - a on falling in the area where the option has value. The new measure, <Q, has Radon-Nikodym derivative (with

120	3.. PROBABil..ITY

respect to IP) f(x), since the old density was 1. Thus

C = Et>( {Sr><>})= lEQ ( l(Sr>a}:;)	
1-a	_
= 1-  a 	lEQ(]_{ST>a})·

When we use this in a simulation, we obtain the estimator
"	1-al
C2	1-  an LJ]_{U;>a}i
k=O
where the u; have density given by f(x). This gives
2
Var(G2) = _!_ (  -  a) a,
n	-a
which is smaJler than the variance of 6 if
1-a	1-a
--<--
a	a
or for large enough a (Why is this not surprising? Why can't we take a = 1 ?).
   As mentioned this is a very simp1e example, and finding a density to improve the variance is often tricky.. Another standard use is to reduce variance when pricing out-of-the-money options. For example, if a call option is stuck at K with K much bigger than S0, the initial stock price, then most paths wil1 finish out of the money in the Black-Scholes model. We therefore shift measure to make the drift of the log of the stock price equal to
logK -log So
qyT
to ensure, that ha]f the paths finish in the money. The pay-off for each path is mu]tip]ied by the likelihood ratio (i.e. the Radon-Nikodym derivative) to ensure, that the expectation does not change.
Here are some possible reJated questions:

• In the above example, show that the expectation under the new measure still gi'ves the correct result by evaluating it directly.
• Is it possible to perform a change of measure from a norma1 distribution
to a Poisson distribution? Why or why not?

3.3. SOLUTIONS	121

• What is the Radon-Nikodym derivative required to change a normal distribution to a Cauchy distribution?
• Why can change of measure be used only to change the drift and not
the diffusion of an Ito process?
• What is the Radon-Nikodym derivative used to change the stochastic
differential equation
dXt = µ(Xt)dt + a-dWt
to
dXt  = a(Xt)dt +a-dWt?
What conditions are needed on this derivative to ensure the change of measure is applicable to these two processes?
?
Solution to Question 3.37. To calculate E(X2), recall that the variance of a
random variable, Var(X), is given by
Var(X) = IE(X2) -	(E(X))2.
For the random variable in que-stion, we have Va.r(X) = a2 and E(X) = µ.
Rearranging the above then gives
E(X2) = a-2 +µ2.
In general, the expectation of a function g(X) is given by
JE(g(X)) = j g(x)f(x)dx,
where J(x) fa the corresponding probability density function (p.d.f.) for X and the integral is taken over an possible values of X. Note that the expectation is only defined if the integral
j lg(x)lf(x)dx
converges. For the random variable X with distribution N (µ, a-), the  p.d.f. is given by
2
f(x) = ./2i<I exp	. -	2a-2	,

122	3. PROBABILITY


and so the second part of the problem is to evaluate
00

r)2

E{exp(.XX)) = /

exp(,,\x)		exp (- (x; 	
-oo	21ra	a

)  dx.

The important point here is to recognise that this integral can be re-written as the integraJ of the p.d.f. of another normal random variable, as follows:

100

1	2	2	2

JE(exp(,,\X)) =

-oo	21ra exp (-2 a2 (x

-  2xµ - 2a

Ax + µ

))  dx

=	loo dx 	.	. (-	_(x	(µ +a2,:\))2 _  µ2+  (µ + 0-2>.)2)
-oo a	exp	2a2	2a2	2a2


_ -	exp(

µ,).. + a2,,\2) loo J2dx1r. exp (-	(x -  (µ +a2,:\))2)  •

2.	_00	21ra	2a 2
Now the integrand is the p.dJ. of a N (µ, + a2 ).., a) random variable, and hence the integral evaluates to 1. This leave.s
11	2
E(exp(AX))	exp (µA+	:-'  ).

Note that one can interpret this function is the moment generating function of the random variable X.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Calculate the moment generating function for the Poisson random variable with parameter a, that is the random variable Y such that
e-aak
W'(Y = k) =	k!	.
• Show that if the moment generating function of X is given by M{>.),
then we can compute moments by

• Note that if Y is N{O, 1), then X = aY +µ. Calculat:e the moment gen­ erating function of Y and use this to confirm your previous calculation of the moment generating function of X.

0

3.3. SOLUTIONS	123

   So1ution to Question 3.38. By 'M(x) is the cumulative Gaussian function', the interviewer means that if Xis	N(O) 1), then
M(x) = JP>(X < x) = (x).
There are two ways to approach this question: the easy way and the hard way. We'll start with the hard way, which is a bit more brute force but won't fail if you don't notice the subtleties of the question. The problem can be tackled by
standard calculation of an expectation by integrating against a density. Let f (x)
denote the density of X, that is

then the question is to evaluate

M(x)f(x)dx..

The easiest way to evaluate this is to observe that M (x) is almost an odd function. Reca11 the definition of an odd function h(x) is one such that h(-x) = -h(x). Then if we set g(x) = M(x) - 1/2 we have
g(-x) = M(-x) -  1
= 1-	1
M(x)- -
2
= 1 - M(x) = -g(x),

using the properties of the cumulative Gaussian. Recalling that the integral from -oo to oo of a product of odd and even (j(x) is clearly even since J(x) = f(-x}) functions is zero (see extension questions), we then have

1 M(x)f(x)dx = .	(M(x) -

1- +1-)f(x)dx
11

=_./_

g(x)f (x)dx + 2 -oo  f (x)dx

00
1
2'
since j(x) is a density and hence integrates to 1.

l24	3. PROBABILITY

   Now for the easy way. Clearly M(X) is a random variable on (0, 1), but what is its distribution? For x E (0, 1), we have
IP(M(X) < x) = f>( (X) < x)
= f'(X' < g;-1(x))
= :z:;,
by the definition of the curou1ative Gaussian function. Hence M(X) has a
uniform distribution on (0, 1), and it thus bas expectation of 1/2.
He.re are some possible re]ated questions:

• Use the definition of odd and even functions to show that the integral from -oo to oo of a product of odd and even functions is zero.
• What is the expectation of /(X)?
• Suppose X was not normal, will we always have the same answer for
JE(F(X)) if Fis	the cumulative distribution function of X'?

?

3.3.2. Stochastic processes.
   Solution to Question 3.39. It's hard to put a limit on how much detail you can go into for this question (so perhaps ask the interviewer to do so for you).
The. basic de.finition of Brownian motion is (see, for example, [6] p. 92) that Wt, t > 0, is a Brown.ian motion if Wo = 0 and for all s < t we have that Wt - Ws is normaUy distributed with mean zero and variance t - s, and is inde,pendent of
Wr for r < s.
   This will probably be sufficient for most interviews, however for completeness we go into further detai1 on what cou1d possib1y define Brownian motjon.
Equivalent descriptions are given in [16] Theorem 3.3.2. If we consider any
to,ti, ... , tm, where O =to< t1 < ··· < tm, then:
(1) Th.e increments


3.3. SOLUTIONS	125

are independent and the distribution of Wt1 -  Wt1_1 is given by
Wt1 - Wt1_1 r-v N(O, tj - tJ-1).
(2) Wt1, Wt2, ••. , Wtm are jointly normally distributed random variables with zero mean and covariance matrix
t1	t1	t1
t1	t2	t2




(3) Wt1, Wt2, •••  , Wtm
0(u1,u2, ... Um)

ti	t2	tm
have the joint moment-generating function

= exp{	1

(u1 + u2 +···Um)2t1 +

1 (u2 + U3 +···um)2( t2 -  t1)+


··· + 1/2u (tm - tm-1)} •
   One way to arrive at a Brownian motion is as a limit of a scaled random walk (see, for example, [16] pp. 83-94). To this end, consider a sequence of coin
tosses, and define

XJ.·.-- {1


if the jth toss is a head, if the jth toss is a tail.

Then define Mo = 0 and for k = I, 2, ...
k
Mk= I:xj.
j=l
This is a random walk, which moves up or down by one for each unit time step. To approximate Brownian motion, we need to speed up time and decrease the distance of each step. Define
(n)	1
Wt	fo,Mnt,
for integer nt, and for non-integer value of nt interpolate linearly between the nearest integer points. As we let n ---t oo we obtain a Brownian motion. Even before this passage to the limit, the scaled random walk has most of the properties

126	3. PROBABILITY

of a Brownian motion (check): if we chooses and t such that O < s < t and ns
and nt are integers then

lE (w<n) - w(n)) = 0
Var (w.(n) - w(n)) - t - s




and the quadratic variation (see Que tion 3.53) of Wt(n) i t.
   What are some other interesting properties of Brownian motion? Unlike our scaled random walk, which was linear where we interpolated, Brownian motion is infinitely jagged and has no linear pieces. Related to this is that it is continuous everywhere, but nowhere differentiable. Also, if Brownian motion crosses a level a, then it crosses it infinitely many times in an arbitrarily short interval. (Recall that these properties are said to hold almost surely.)
   For a bit of history, Brownian motion is named after the botanist Robert Brown, who is regarded as having discovered it in 1827. Brown observed the movement of pollen particle floating in water under a microscope was quite jittery.
   Finally, in higher dimensions we define the k-dimensional Brownian motion to be a vector of k independent Brownian motions.
Here are some possible related questions:

• What is a diffusion process?
• Why is Brownian motion useful in finance?

?

   Solution to Question 3.40. The crucial observation is that our location i a martingale. Our expected position at any time in the future is our current position. This extends to our current position at a random time provided the random time is a stopping time with finite expectation: this is the optional sampling theorem.

3.3. SOLUTIONS	127

   Let Xt be the value at time t. It is a martingale. The time of first hitting the boundary, r, is a stopping time with finite expectation. So Xt stopped at r is a martingale. Its expected value is therefore X0.
Let p the probabi1ity of hitting 1000. The expected value at stopping is then

lOOOp.

If we start at 80, we immediately have

p = 8/100,

and the probability of hitting zero first is

92/100.

(Note: make sure to answer the question asked: the probability of hitting zero. )
   To be totally correct we really need to show that the stopping time has finite expectation and so the theorem applies.
The best reference for these sorts of problems is [19].
Here are some possible related questions:

• Solve the general case: we start at k and terminate at O or L.
• What if the probability of an up-move is q E (0, I) instead of 0.5?

?

   Solution to Question 3.41. Once we recall the stochastic differential equa­ tion for a log-normal Brownian motion, the solution to this question follows immediately from Ito's formula. Recall that if St follows a log-normal Brownian motion, then


128	3. PROBABil.JTY

forµ, er > 0 and a Brownian motion Wt. To find the process for the square of
St, Jet Yt = J(St), where f(x) = x2, and so

d(St)2 = dYt = J'(St)dSt +f"(St)(dSt)2
=2StdBt + (dSt)2
= 2µ(St)2dt + 2a(St)2dWt + a2(St)2dt
= (2µ + a2)Ytdt + 2aYtdWt.

Notice that this means Yt is also a log-normal Brownian motion. The process St has drift parameterµ and diffusion a, while the process (St)2 has drift parameter (2µ + cr2) and diffusion 2a.
   The above derivation is the typical way to proce.ed when faced with this sort of question. However, since we know the exact form of the solution of St th.ere is a quicker, and perhaps more intuitive, way to derive the same result. The solution of the stochastic differential equation






is given by




2
S, = So exp {  



) t+ u


w,}



(verify this using Ito's formula).. From this, it is dear that




which immediately shows that (St)2 is a log-normal Brownian motion with the mentioned parameters.

3.3. SOLUTIONS	W29

Here are some possible related questions:

• Without further work, write down the stochastic diffe.rential equation for (St)kt for positive .integer k.
• If Rt is a d-dimensional (for integer a) Bessel proce-ss, that is
dRt = d-1 dt + dWt,
2
what process does the square of Rt follow? Derive this in two ways
- first by applying ltfi's formula to the above stochastic differential equation, and secondly by starting with the definitfon of the Besse] process as the distance from the origin of ad-dimensional Brownian motion (see the extension questions for Question 3.48).
?
   Solution to Question 3.42. The price still satisfies the Black-Scholes equation. To see this, check the derivation of the Black-Scholes equation. You will notice that the form of the payoff is not important, instead it is only important that the option price is a function of the current time and stock price. Hence for any claim whose payoff satisfies this condition, the price will satisfy the Black-Scholes equation, and the only things that will change are the boundary conditions.
    It is tempting to answer this question in a similar manner to Question 3.4 l. We know that if St is log-normal then1/2= S'/: is again log-normal, with drift paramete.r (2r + u2) and diffusion parameter 2a-, where r is the intefest rate and
V the current square of the stock price. Then we could argue the equation on the ca11 option C is given by the Black-Scholes equation using these parameters,

that is
ac
at

2	2 a

2c	(	2) .	ac

2a Vav2 + 2r + a . V av - rG = 0.
Note that this just corresponds to a change of variable in the original Black­
Scholes equation.
    It is very easy to go badly wrong on this sort of question: a very important fact to remember is that   is NOT the price process of a traded asset we cannot treat it the same way we treat St in the derivation of the Black-Scholes equation. In particulart    will not have drift r in the risk-neutral measure.

130	3. PROBABll.ITY

Here is a possible related question:

• Demonstrate how to derive the above equation by a change of vadable.
?
   Solution to Question 3.43. This process is a mean-reverting process. Why? If the stock price is above µ, then the drift term will be negative; making the trend of the process downwards, and toward the level µ. If the stock price is below µ, the drift tenn is positive and the process again moves toward µ. Thus whatever level the process is at, the general trend is to head back to the level µ, and we call this trait mean reversion (with mean level µ). The size of the parameter o; affects the size of the drift when the stock price is a given level away from the me.an µ. Thus it affects the rate of the mean reversion.
   The drift term of the process has no impact on the price of a call option, since we know that under the correct pricing measure we need the discounted stock price to have. zero dr1fl This is achieved by changing the drift of the original process, rendering any initial drift term irrelevant.
Here are some possible related questions:
• What stochastic differential equation does the process Xt = St follow?
• For the geometric Brownian motion process Yt foHowing the stochastic
diffe:rential equation
dYt = µYi,dt + uYt dWt,
what effect do the parameters µ and u have?
• The Bessel process Rt of dimension 3 follows the stochastic differential equation

dRt = Rt dt + dWt,
and starts at a position R.o = x > 0. Explain what characte,ristics meao that this process can never be negative.

?

3.3. SOLUTIONS	131

Solution to Question 3.44. This is a straight-forward application of ltots
formula. Let Xt = J(St), where f(x) = log(x). Then
dXt = aJ	(dSt) +	EPf	(dSt)2
8x x;;:.St	2 8x2 x=St
1 ,	·	.	1	2  2
St (µStdt	a StdWt) -  28	a- St dt)
0"2
= µdt + a-dWt - 2dt
= (µ -2

The alternative is to realise


so
X, = log So+ (µ-":) t + aW,,

from which the solut1on is obvious.
Here. are some possible related questions:

• Given the above result, write down the solution of Xt, and hence St,
• What is the SDE for (St}2?

?

   Solution to Question 3.45. Odds are the interviewer wants you to show Xt is a process with zero drift component, by a simple application of It6 's formula. There are some more technical aspects to the question, but we'll ignore those for the moment and just address this issue.
To show Xt has zero drift, we calculate its stochastic differential equation.
We have Xt = g( t, Wt), where
g(t, x) = cosh().x) exp(-..\2t/2).

132	3. PROBABILITY


This give-s

aagt =



).2
-2g(t,x),






and

aax2g


= ..\2 cosh(..\x) exp(-..X2t/2).

Applying lt<Ys formula we find
dXt = dg(t,Wt)
= 9t(t,Wt)dt + 9x(t1 x)lx=WtdWt + 9xx(t, x)lx=Wt(dWt)2
,.\2	.	. ,	,\2
= -2 Xtdt	sinh(XWt) exp(-.X2t/2)dWt	2 Xtdt
= ,\sinh(. Wt) exp(-.\2t/2)dWt,
which shows Xt is a process with zero drift (all of the 'dt' terms canceled). Hopefully, this is a11 that is required of you from this question.
   However technically this is not the complete story, and we address the additional requirement here. If Xt is a martingale, it must satisfy the properties
(1) IE(XslFt) = Xt,
(2) IE(IXtl) < oo for all t,
where Fe is the filtration generated by the Brownian motion Wt, These are known to be satis:fied (see for example [11] p.33) if
X, = Xo+	f(t,W,)dW,,


and

E (LT f(t,W,)2dt) < CX),

We have already seen Xt satisfies
x, = Xo + fa' f (t, w,)dW,,

3.3. SOWTIONS	133

where f(t,Wt)= ).sinh().Wt) exp(-.\2t/2). We need to confirm the second condition. Substituting the expression for f (t, Wt) we see




using the result from Question 3.37. Evaluating this integral confirms the required condition, and we are done.
Here are some possible related questions:

• Show that the following processes are martingales:
(1) Xt = Wl - t;
(2) Yt = Wl	- 3tWt;
(3) Zt = exp (o-'Wt - 1/2cr2t) .

?

   So1ution to Question 3.46. There are some further technical considerations, but in general if such a process is a martingale then the stochastic differential equation it satisfies will only have a diffusion (dl-1/2) term. The technical consid­ erations are only necessary if this condition is satisfiedt so we begin by applying
Ito's formula to Xt = Wl, This gives

dXt == 3W?d"'t + 3Wt(dl3/4)2
= 3Wtdt + 3WldWt,

Since there is a drift term (3Wt) we can conclude that Wl is not a martingale.

134	3. PROBABILITY

Here are some possible related questions:

• 'What other condition do you need to check if the process has zero drift?
• Write down two simple martingales involving Brownian motion.
• Show that 2 -tis a martingale, both by the method used here and the 'standard' method (that is, show I [Wl - ti.rs] =	s, s < t).
?
   Solution to Question 3.47. To apply lt6's lemma; we first need to determine first and second de.rivatives of the function / (x) = 2x. This is straightforward once you observe

From here it is clear we have
f'(x) = log(2)exlog2 = log(2)2x,
J"(x) = (log(2))2exfog2 = (log(2))22x.
If we set Yt = 2Wt, this immediately gives
dYt = log(2)2WtdWt + i(log(2))22Wt(dWt)2
= log(2)YtdWt + 1	.2
2(Iog(2)) itdt.
Since the stochastic differential equation for Yt has a non-zero drift term, the
process cannot be a martingale.
Here are some possible related questions:
• Define a new process by Xt = 2Wi g(Wt). Prove that in order for Xt
to be a martingale, it is necessary for the function g to satisfy
(log{2))2g(x) + 2log(2)g'(x) + g''(x) = 0.
• Can you explain in words why 2Wt  will not be a martingale?

?

3.3. SOLUTIONS	135

Solution to Question 3.48. Each of Wt and Zt are distributed normally with
mean zero and variance t. Hence we can simplify the first part of this question by considering the case t = 1, the general case is a straight-forward extension. Each of W1 and Z1 are normaHy distributed random variables with mean zero and variance one which we denote by Wand Z respective]y.
We begin by conditioning on the value of .Z in the expression for the
distribution of the ratio:

Il'(: < u) = 1_: P (:  < uiz = z) IP'(Z E dz)

0
= /_

00
IP(W > zu)JP>(Z E dz)	/

P(W < zu)IP(Z E dz)

-oo	lo
=	(l	-	P(W < zu))IP'(Z E dz)
+ f Il'(W < zu) IP'(Z E dz).

We then differentiate the above expression with respect to u to find the probability density function for the ratio. denoting the density of W by ˘.,
IP' c;E ,ru) = [=-Z<p(zu)IP'(Z E dz)
L''° Z<p(zu]P(Z E dz)
=1_: lzlt/>(zu)IP'(Z E dz).

This final expression, which gives the density of a ratio of two independent random variables as an integraJ of their densities, is often (unimaginatively)

136	3. PROBABil.JTY

called the ratio distribution.. From here we use the form of </>,


IP (Wz E	)

1	/_
1i."

2
lzl exp {	(zu) -

2
z  } dz

du	2

-oo	2	2

= 1-	zexp {

---(zuj2

2
- z- .} .dz

7f  O	.	2	2
=![0 zexp{-z(2 2 +1/2)}dz,

the second equality due to the even integrand. We then use. the observation that
for C > 0,

100



00
ze-cz2 dz=.


1-e-cydy

0	0	2
-1 .	00	1
= 2c [e-cy]o = 2c·


This gives



JP(


W-z E	)


= 1- .. l	•
7f U

Thus we have that lf has a standard Cauchy distribution.
    The second part of this question is answered by using the product rule for stochastic processes: the differential of the. product of two stochastic processes is given by


Before we can apply this rule we need to deduce the differential for ( Zt)-1.
Using Ito's formula for f(Zt), where f(x) = x-1 gives


3.3. SOLUTIONS	137

Then, applying the product rule to = Wt(Zt)-1• we obtain
d (i)  =! dW, +W,d GJ + dWtd G.)
 =	dW, + w; (- ;ldZ' + ;ldt)
+ dWt (- Zd[.Zt + 2Z_f dt)
1	Wt	Wt
-dW,t - -d2 Zt	z3 .	I
Zt	Zt	t
using dZtdWt = 0 since the two Brownian motions are independent.
Here are some possible related questions:
• Prove the first part of the question for general t.
• If instead we are concerned with the product WtZt, derive the equivalent
of the ratio distdbution.
• Repeat the second question assuming Wt and Zt have correlation p,
that is
dWtdZt = pdt.
What happens as p -t· 1?
• (Bessel processes). Let Wl,...,Wf be independent Brownian motions.
Define
Rt=	(Wl)2 +··· + (Wf)2.
Show that Rt satisfies the stochastic differential equation
dRt = d-1 dt + dWt,
2
for some Brownian motion Wt.
?

   Solution to Question 3.49. The most general form of the Omstein-Uhlenbeck proce.ss is the mean-reverting proce.ss evolving according to the SOE


138	3. PROBABILITY

The SOE is solved by introducing the integrating factor e0t. and evaluating the differential d (e9t Xt) :
d ( e9t Xt)  = 0eet Xtdt + e0td·Xt
= 0eet Xtdt + e0t0(µ -  Xt)dt + eetadWt
= /Jt8µ.dt + efJtadWt.
The stochastic differential wdtten above is just shorthand for the equation
ellt X, = Xo +1' 8µ,e9'ds +1' e9'o-dWs,
and evaluating the first integral gives the solution
X, = Xoe-llt + µ, ( 1 - e-Bt) +1' ae8(•-t)dW,.

Here are some po sible related que tions:
• Show that E(Xt) = Xoe-0t + µ.(1 - e-0t).
• Show that Var(Xt) = E(Xl) - (1E(Xt))2 =	e-29t).
?

    Solution to Question 3.50. This question uses one of the most frequently used and simplest tricks in mathematics: x = x + y - y. We assume without loss of generality that s < t. One of the important properties of Brownian motion is independence of increments: for any ti < t2 < ta, Wt2-  Wt1 is independent of Wt3-  Wt2- Then:
IE(WsWt) = 1E (W (W + (Wt - Ws))
= lE (W;) +1E (Ws(Wt - Ws))
= s + 1E(Ws)IE(Wt - Ws),
where the final line uses the independence of increments. Since Wt2 -  Wt1 is normally distributed with mean zero

